1:1 Va gur ortvaavat Tbq perngrq gur urnira naq gur rnegu.

1:2 Naq gur rnegu jnf jvgubhg sbez, naq ibvq; naq qnexarff jnf hcba
gur snpr bs gur qrrc. Naq gur Fcvevg bs Tbq zbirq hcba gur snpr bs gur
jngref.

1:3 Naq Tbq fnvq, Yrg gurer or yvtug: naq gurer jnf yvtug.

1:4 Naq Tbq fnj gur yvtug, gung vg jnf tbbq: naq Tbq qvivqrq gur yvtug
sebz gur qnexarff.

1:5 Naq Tbq pnyyrq gur yvtug Qnl, naq gur qnexarff ur pnyyrq Avtug.
Naq gur riravat naq gur zbeavat jrer gur svefg qnl.

1:6 Naq Tbq fnvq, Yrg gurer or n sveznzrag va gur zvqfg bs gur jngref,
naq yrg vg qvivqr gur jngref sebz gur jngref.

1:7 Naq Tbq znqr gur sveznzrag, naq qvivqrq gur jngref juvpu jrer
haqre gur sveznzrag sebz gur jngref juvpu jrer nobir gur sveznzrag:
naq vg jnf fb.

1:8 Naq Tbq pnyyrq gur sveznzrag Urnira. Naq gur riravat naq gur
zbeavat jrer gur frpbaq qnl.

1:9 Naq Tbq fnvq, Yrg gur jngref haqre gur urnira or tngurerq gbtrgure
hagb bar cynpr, naq yrg gur qel ynaq nccrne: naq vg jnf fb.

1:10 Naq Tbq pnyyrq gur qel ynaq Rnegu; naq gur tngurevat gbtrgure bs
gur jngref pnyyrq ur Frnf: naq Tbq fnj gung vg jnf tbbq.

1:11 Naq Tbq fnvq, Yrg gur rnegu oevat sbegu tenff, gur ureo lvryqvat
frrq, naq gur sehvg gerr lvryqvat sehvg nsgre uvf xvaq, jubfr frrq vf
va vgfrys, hcba gur rnegu: naq vg jnf fb.

1:12 Naq gur rnegu oebhtug sbegu tenff, naq ureo lvryqvat frrq nsgre
uvf xvaq, naq gur gerr lvryqvat sehvg, jubfr frrq jnf va vgfrys, nsgre
uvf xvaq: naq Tbq fnj gung vg jnf tbbq.

1:13 Naq gur riravat naq gur zbeavat jrer gur guveq qnl.

1:14 Naq Tbq fnvq, Yrg gurer or yvtugf va gur sveznzrag bs gur urnira
gb qvivqr gur qnl sebz gur avtug; naq yrg gurz or sbe fvtaf, naq sbe
frnfbaf, naq sbe qnlf, naq lrnef: 1:15 Naq yrg gurz or sbe yvtugf va
gur sveznzrag bs gur urnira gb tvir yvtug hcba gur rnegu: naq vg jnf
fb.

1:16 Naq Tbq znqr gjb terng yvtugf; gur terngre yvtug gb ehyr gur qnl,
naq gur yrffre yvtug gb ehyr gur avtug: ur znqr gur fgnef nyfb.

1:17 Naq Tbq frg gurz va gur sveznzrag bs gur urnira gb tvir yvtug
hcba gur rnegu, 1:18 Naq gb ehyr bire gur qnl naq bire gur avtug, naq
gb qvivqr gur yvtug sebz gur qnexarff: naq Tbq fnj gung vg jnf tbbq.

1:19 Naq gur riravat naq gur zbeavat jrer gur sbhegu qnl.

1:20 Naq Tbq fnvq, Yrg gur jngref oevat sbegu nohaqnagyl gur zbivat
perngher gung ungu yvsr, naq sbjy gung znl syl nobir gur rnegu va gur
bcra sveznzrag bs urnira.

1:21 Naq Tbq perngrq terng junyrf, naq rirel yvivat perngher gung
zbirgu, juvpu gur jngref oebhtug sbegu nohaqnagyl, nsgre gurve xvaq,
naq rirel jvatrq sbjy nsgre uvf xvaq: naq Tbq fnj gung vg jnf tbbq.

1:22 Naq Tbq oyrffrq gurz, fnlvat, Or sehvgshy, naq zhygvcyl, naq svyy
gur jngref va gur frnf, naq yrg sbjy zhygvcyl va gur rnegu.

1:23 Naq gur riravat naq gur zbeavat jrer gur svsgu qnl.

1:24 Naq Tbq fnvq, Yrg gur rnegu oevat sbegu gur yvivat perngher nsgre
uvf xvaq, pnggyr, naq perrcvat guvat, naq ornfg bs gur rnegu nsgre uvf
xvaq: naq vg jnf fb.

1:25 Naq Tbq znqr gur ornfg bs gur rnegu nsgre uvf xvaq, naq pnggyr
nsgre gurve xvaq, naq rirel guvat gung perrcrgu hcba gur rnegu nsgre
uvf xvaq: naq Tbq fnj gung vg jnf tbbq.

1:26 Naq Tbq fnvq, Yrg hf znxr zna va bhe vzntr, nsgre bhe yvxrarff:
naq yrg gurz unir qbzvavba bire gur svfu bs gur frn, naq bire gur sbjy
bs gur nve, naq bire gur pnggyr, naq bire nyy gur rnegu, naq bire
rirel perrcvat guvat gung perrcrgu hcba gur rnegu.

1:27 Fb Tbq perngrq zna va uvf bja vzntr, va gur vzntr bs Tbq perngrq
ur uvz; znyr naq srznyr perngrq ur gurz.

1:28 Naq Tbq oyrffrq gurz, naq Tbq fnvq hagb gurz, Or sehvgshy, naq
zhygvcyl, naq ercyravfu gur rnegu, naq fhoqhr vg: naq unir qbzvavba
bire gur svfu bs gur frn, naq bire gur sbjy bs gur nve, naq bire rirel
yvivat guvat gung zbirgu hcba gur rnegu.

1:29 Naq Tbq fnvq, Orubyq, V unir tvira lbh rirel ureo ornevat frrq,
juvpu vf hcba gur snpr bs nyy gur rnegu, naq rirel gerr, va gur juvpu
vf gur sehvg bs n gerr lvryqvat frrq; gb lbh vg funyy or sbe zrng.

1:30 Naq gb rirel ornfg bs gur rnegu, naq gb rirel sbjy bs gur nve,
naq gb rirel guvat gung perrcrgu hcba gur rnegu, jurerva gurer vf
yvsr, V unir tvira rirel terra ureo sbe zrng: naq vg jnf fb.

1:31 Naq Tbq fnj rirel guvat gung ur unq znqr, naq, orubyq, vg jnf
irel tbbq. Naq gur riravat naq gur zbeavat jrer gur fvkgu qnl.

2:1 Guhf gur urniraf naq gur rnegu jrer svavfurq, naq nyy gur ubfg bs
gurz.

2:2 Naq ba gur friragu qnl Tbq raqrq uvf jbex juvpu ur unq znqr; naq
ur erfgrq ba gur friragu qnl sebz nyy uvf jbex juvpu ur unq znqr.

2:3 Naq Tbq oyrffrq gur friragu qnl, naq fnapgvsvrq vg: orpnhfr gung
va vg ur unq erfgrq sebz nyy uvf jbex juvpu Tbq perngrq naq znqr.

2:4 Gurfr ner gur trarengvbaf bs gur urniraf naq bs gur rnegu jura
gurl jrer perngrq, va gur qnl gung gur YBEQ Tbq znqr gur rnegu naq gur
urniraf, 2:5 Naq rirel cynag bs gur svryq orsber vg jnf va gur rnegu,
naq rirel ureo bs gur svryq orsber vg terj: sbe gur YBEQ Tbq unq abg
pnhfrq vg gb enva hcba gur rnegu, naq gurer jnf abg n zna gb gvyy gur
tebhaq.

2:6 Ohg gurer jrag hc n zvfg sebz gur rnegu, naq jngrerq gur jubyr
snpr bs gur tebhaq.

2:7 Naq gur YBEQ Tbq sbezrq zna bs gur qhfg bs gur tebhaq, naq
oerngurq vagb uvf abfgevyf gur oerngu bs yvsr; naq zna orpnzr n yvivat
fbhy.

2:8 Naq gur YBEQ Tbq cynagrq n tneqra rnfgjneq va Rqra; naq gurer ur
chg gur zna jubz ur unq sbezrq.

2:9 Naq bhg bs gur tebhaq znqr gur YBEQ Tbq gb tebj rirel gerr gung vf
cyrnfnag gb gur fvtug, naq tbbq sbe sbbq; gur gerr bs yvsr nyfb va gur
zvqfg bs gur tneqra, naq gur gerr bs xabjyrqtr bs tbbq naq rivy.

2:10 Naq n evire jrag bhg bs Rqra gb jngre gur tneqra; naq sebz gurapr
vg jnf cnegrq, naq orpnzr vagb sbhe urnqf.

2:11 Gur anzr bs gur svefg vf Cvfba: gung vf vg juvpu pbzcnffrgu gur
jubyr ynaq bs Univynu, jurer gurer vf tbyq; 2:12 Naq gur tbyq bs gung
ynaq vf tbbq: gurer vf oqryyvhz naq gur balk fgbar.

2:13 Naq gur anzr bs gur frpbaq evire vf Tvuba: gur fnzr vf vg gung
pbzcnffrgu gur jubyr ynaq bs Rguvbcvn.

2:14 Naq gur anzr bs gur guveq evire vf Uvqqrxry: gung vf vg juvpu
tbrgu gbjneq gur rnfg bs Nfflevn. Naq gur sbhegu evire vf Rhcuengrf.

2:15 Naq gur YBEQ Tbq gbbx gur zna, naq chg uvz vagb gur tneqra bs
Rqra gb qerff vg naq gb xrrc vg.

2:16 Naq gur YBEQ Tbq pbzznaqrq gur zna, fnlvat, Bs rirel gerr bs gur
tneqra gubh znlrfg serryl rng: 2:17 Ohg bs gur gerr bs gur xabjyrqtr
bs tbbq naq rivy, gubh funyg abg rng bs vg: sbe va gur qnl gung gubh
rngrfg gurerbs gubh funyg fheryl qvr.

2:18 Naq gur YBEQ Tbq fnvq, Vg vf abg tbbq gung gur zna fubhyq or
nybar; V jvyy znxr uvz na uryc zrrg sbe uvz.

2:19 Naq bhg bs gur tebhaq gur YBEQ Tbq sbezrq rirel ornfg bs gur
svryq, naq rirel sbjy bs gur nve; naq oebhtug gurz hagb Nqnz gb frr
jung ur jbhyq pnyy gurz: naq jungfbrire Nqnz pnyyrq rirel yvivat
perngher, gung jnf gur anzr gurerbs.

2:20 Naq Nqnz tnir anzrf gb nyy pnggyr, naq gb gur sbjy bs gur nve,
naq gb rirel ornfg bs gur svryq; ohg sbe Nqnz gurer jnf abg sbhaq na
uryc zrrg sbe uvz.

2:21 Naq gur YBEQ Tbq pnhfrq n qrrc fyrrc gb snyy hcba Nqnz, naq ur
fyrcg: naq ur gbbx bar bs uvf evof, naq pybfrq hc gur syrfu vafgrnq
gurerbs; 2:22 Naq gur evo, juvpu gur YBEQ Tbq unq gnxra sebz zna, znqr
ur n jbzna, naq oebhtug ure hagb gur zna.

2:23 Naq Nqnz fnvq, Guvf vf abj obar bs zl obarf, naq syrfu bs zl
syrfu: fur funyy or pnyyrq Jbzna, orpnhfr fur jnf gnxra bhg bs Zna.

2:24 Gurersber funyy n zna yrnir uvf sngure naq uvf zbgure, naq funyy
pyrnir hagb uvf jvsr: naq gurl funyy or bar syrfu.

2:25 Naq gurl jrer obgu anxrq, gur zna naq uvf jvsr, naq jrer abg
nfunzrq.

3:1 Abj gur frecrag jnf zber fhogvy guna nal ornfg bs gur svryq juvpu
gur YBEQ Tbq unq znqr. Naq ur fnvq hagb gur jbzna, Lrn, ungu Tbq fnvq,
Lr funyy abg rng bs rirel gerr bs gur tneqra?  3:2 Naq gur jbzna fnvq
hagb gur frecrag, Jr znl rng bs gur sehvg bs gur gerrf bs gur tneqra:
3:3 Ohg bs gur sehvg bs gur gerr juvpu vf va gur zvqfg bs gur tneqra,
Tbq ungu fnvq, Lr funyy abg rng bs vg, arvgure funyy lr gbhpu vg, yrfg
lr qvr.

3:4 Naq gur frecrag fnvq hagb gur jbzna, Lr funyy abg fheryl qvr: 3:5
Sbe Tbq qbgu xabj gung va gur qnl lr rng gurerbs, gura lbhe rlrf funyy
or bcrarq, naq lr funyy or nf tbqf, xabjvat tbbq naq rivy.

3:6 Naq jura gur jbzna fnj gung gur gerr jnf tbbq sbe sbbq, naq gung
vg jnf cyrnfnag gb gur rlrf, naq n gerr gb or qrfverq gb znxr bar
jvfr, fur gbbx bs gur sehvg gurerbs, naq qvq rng, naq tnir nyfb hagb
ure uhfonaq jvgu ure; naq ur qvq rng.

3:7 Naq gur rlrf bs gurz obgu jrer bcrarq, naq gurl xarj gung gurl
jrer anxrq; naq gurl frjrq svt yrnirf gbtrgure, naq znqr gurzfryirf
ncebaf.

3:8 Naq gurl urneq gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ Tbq jnyxvat va gur tneqra va
gur pbby bs gur qnl: naq Nqnz naq uvf jvsr uvq gurzfryirf sebz gur
cerfrapr bs gur YBEQ Tbq nzbatfg gur gerrf bs gur tneqra.

3:9 Naq gur YBEQ Tbq pnyyrq hagb Nqnz, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Jurer neg
gubh?  3:10 Naq ur fnvq, V urneq gul ibvpr va gur tneqra, naq V jnf
nsenvq, orpnhfr V jnf anxrq; naq V uvq zlfrys.

3:11 Naq ur fnvq, Jub gbyq gurr gung gubh jnfg anxrq? Unfg gubh rngra
bs gur gerr, jurerbs V pbzznaqrq gurr gung gubh fubhyqrfg abg rng?
3:12 Naq gur zna fnvq, Gur jbzna jubz gubh tnirfg gb or jvgu zr, fur
tnir zr bs gur gerr, naq V qvq rng.

3:13 Naq gur YBEQ Tbq fnvq hagb gur jbzna, Jung vf guvf gung gubh unfg
qbar? Naq gur jbzna fnvq, Gur frecrag orthvyrq zr, naq V qvq rng.

3:14 Naq gur YBEQ Tbq fnvq hagb gur frecrag, Orpnhfr gubh unfg qbar
guvf, gubh neg phefrq nobir nyy pnggyr, naq nobir rirel ornfg bs gur
svryq; hcba gul oryyl funyg gubh tb, naq qhfg funyg gubh rng nyy gur
qnlf bs gul yvsr: 3:15 Naq V jvyy chg razvgl orgjrra gurr naq gur
jbzna, naq orgjrra gul frrq naq ure frrq; vg funyy oehvfr gul urnq,
naq gubh funyg oehvfr uvf urry.

3:16 Hagb gur jbzna ur fnvq, V jvyy terngyl zhygvcyl gul fbeebj naq
gul pbaprcgvba; va fbeebj gubh funyg oevat sbegu puvyqera; naq gul
qrfver funyy or gb gul uhfonaq, naq ur funyy ehyr bire gurr.

3:17 Naq hagb Nqnz ur fnvq, Orpnhfr gubh unfg urnexrarq hagb gur ibvpr
bs gul jvsr, naq unfg rngra bs gur gerr, bs juvpu V pbzznaqrq gurr,
fnlvat, Gubh funyg abg rng bs vg: phefrq vf gur tebhaq sbe gul fnxr;
va fbeebj funyg gubh rng bs vg nyy gur qnlf bs gul yvsr; 3:18 Gubeaf
nyfb naq guvfgyrf funyy vg oevat sbegu gb gurr; naq gubh funyg rng gur
ureo bs gur svryq; 3:19 Va gur fjrng bs gul snpr funyg gubh rng oernq,
gvyy gubh erghea hagb gur tebhaq; sbe bhg bs vg jnfg gubh gnxra: sbe
qhfg gubh neg, naq hagb qhfg funyg gubh erghea.

3:20 Naq Nqnz pnyyrq uvf jvsr'f anzr Rir; orpnhfr fur jnf gur zbgure
bs nyy yvivat.

3:21 Hagb Nqnz nyfb naq gb uvf jvsr qvq gur YBEQ Tbq znxr pbngf bs
fxvaf, naq pybgurq gurz.

3:22 Naq gur YBEQ Tbq fnvq, Orubyq, gur zna vf orpbzr nf bar bs hf, gb
xabj tbbq naq rivy: naq abj, yrfg ur chg sbegu uvf unaq, naq gnxr nyfb
bs gur gerr bs yvsr, naq rng, naq yvir sbe rire: 3:23 Gurersber gur
YBEQ Tbq frag uvz sbegu sebz gur tneqra bs Rqra, gb gvyy gur tebhaq
sebz jurapr ur jnf gnxra.

3:24 Fb ur qebir bhg gur zna; naq ur cynprq ng gur rnfg bs gur tneqra
bs Rqra Purehovzf, naq n synzvat fjbeq juvpu ghearq rirel jnl, gb xrrc
gur jnl bs gur gerr bs yvsr.

4:1 Naq Nqnz xarj Rir uvf jvsr; naq fur pbaprvirq, naq oner Pnva, naq
fnvq, V unir tbggra n zna sebz gur YBEQ.

4:2 Naq fur ntnva oner uvf oebgure Nory. Naq Nory jnf n xrrcre bs
furrc, ohg Pnva jnf n gvyyre bs gur tebhaq.

4:3 Naq va cebprff bs gvzr vg pnzr gb cnff, gung Pnva oebhtug bs gur
sehvg bs gur tebhaq na bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ.

4:4 Naq Nory, ur nyfb oebhtug bs gur svefgyvatf bs uvf sybpx naq bs
gur sng gurerbs. Naq gur YBEQ unq erfcrpg hagb Nory naq gb uvf
bssrevat: 4:5 Ohg hagb Pnva naq gb uvf bssrevat ur unq abg erfcrpg.
Naq Pnva jnf irel jebgu, naq uvf pbhagranapr sryy.

4:6 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Pnva, Jul neg gubh jebgu? naq jul vf gul
pbhagranapr snyyra?  4:7 Vs gubh qbrfg jryy, funyg gubh abg or
npprcgrq? naq vs gubh qbrfg abg jryy, fva yvrgu ng gur qbbe. Naq hagb
gurr funyy or uvf qrfver, naq gubh funyg ehyr bire uvz.

4:8 Naq Pnva gnyxrq jvgu Nory uvf oebgure: naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura
gurl jrer va gur svryq, gung Pnva ebfr hc ntnvafg Nory uvf oebgure,
naq fyrj uvz.

4:9 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Pnva, Jurer vf Nory gul oebgure? Naq ur
fnvq, V xabj abg: Nz V zl oebgure'f xrrcre?  4:10 Naq ur fnvq, Jung
unfg gubh qbar? gur ibvpr bs gul oebgure'f oybbq pevrgu hagb zr sebz
gur tebhaq.

4:11 Naq abj neg gubh phefrq sebz gur rnegu, juvpu ungu bcrarq ure
zbhgu gb erprvir gul oebgure'f oybbq sebz gul unaq; 4:12 Jura gubh
gvyyrfg gur tebhaq, vg funyy abg uraprsbegu lvryq hagb gurr ure
fgeratgu; n shtvgvir naq n intnobaq funyg gubh or va gur rnegu.

4:13 Naq Pnva fnvq hagb gur YBEQ, Zl chavfuzrag vf terngre guna V pna
orne.

4:14 Orubyq, gubh unfg qevira zr bhg guvf qnl sebz gur snpr bs gur
rnegu; naq sebz gul snpr funyy V or uvq; naq V funyy or n shtvgvir naq
n intnobaq va gur rnegu; naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, gung rirel bar
gung svaqrgu zr funyy fynl zr.

4:15 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb uvz, Gurersber jubfbrire fynlrgu Pnva,
iratrnapr funyy or gnxra ba uvz frirasbyq. Naq gur YBEQ frg n znex
hcba Pnva, yrfg nal svaqvat uvz fubhyq xvyy uvz.

4:16 Naq Pnva jrag bhg sebz gur cerfrapr bs gur YBEQ, naq qjryg va gur
ynaq bs Abq, ba gur rnfg bs Rqra.

4:17 Naq Pnva xarj uvf jvsr; naq fur pbaprvirq, naq oner Rabpu: naq ur
ohvyqrq n pvgl, naq pnyyrq gur anzr bs gur pvgl, nsgre gur anzr bs uvf
fba, Rabpu.

4:18 Naq hagb Rabpu jnf obea Venq: naq Venq ortng Zruhwnry: naq
Zruhwnry ortng Zrguhfnry: naq Zrguhfnry ortng Ynzrpu.

4:19 Naq Ynzrpu gbbx hagb uvz gjb jvirf: gur anzr bs gur bar jnf Nqnu,
naq gur anzr bs gur bgure Mvyynu.

4:20 Naq Nqnu oner Wnony: ur jnf gur sngure bs fhpu nf qjryy va gragf,
naq bs fhpu nf unir pnggyr.

4:21 Naq uvf oebgure'f anzr jnf Whony: ur jnf gur sngure bs nyy fhpu
nf unaqyr gur unec naq betna.

4:22 Naq Mvyynu, fur nyfb oner Ghonypnva, na vafgehpgre bs rirel
negvsvpre va oenff naq veba: naq gur fvfgre bs Ghonypnva jnf Annznu.

4:23 Naq Ynzrpu fnvq hagb uvf jvirf, Nqnu naq Mvyynu, Urne zl ibvpr;
lr jvirf bs Ynzrpu, urnexra hagb zl fcrrpu: sbe V unir fynva n zna gb
zl jbhaqvat, naq n lbhat zna gb zl uheg.

4:24 Vs Pnva funyy or niratrq frirasbyq, gehyl Ynzrpu friragl naq
frirasbyq.

4:25 Naq Nqnz xarj uvf jvsr ntnva; naq fur oner n fba, naq pnyyrq uvf
anzr Frgu: Sbe Tbq, fnvq fur, ungu nccbvagrq zr nabgure frrq vafgrnq
bs Nory, jubz Pnva fyrj.

4:26 Naq gb Frgu, gb uvz nyfb gurer jnf obea n fba; naq ur pnyyrq uvf
anzr Rabf: gura ortna zra gb pnyy hcba gur anzr bs gur YBEQ.

5:1 Guvf vf gur obbx bs gur trarengvbaf bs Nqnz. Va gur qnl gung Tbq
perngrq zna, va gur yvxrarff bs Tbq znqr ur uvz; 5:2 Znyr naq srznyr
perngrq ur gurz; naq oyrffrq gurz, naq pnyyrq gurve anzr Nqnz, va gur
qnl jura gurl jrer perngrq.

5:3 Naq Nqnz yvirq na uhaqerq naq guvegl lrnef, naq ortng n fba va uvf
bja yvxrarff, naq nsgre uvf vzntr; naq pnyyrq uvf anzr Frgu: 5:4 Naq
gur qnlf bs Nqnz nsgre ur unq ortbggra Frgu jrer rvtug uhaqerq lrnef:
naq ur ortng fbaf naq qnhtugref: 5:5 Naq nyy gur qnlf gung Nqnz yvirq
jrer avar uhaqerq naq guvegl lrnef: naq ur qvrq.

5:6 Naq Frgu yvirq na uhaqerq naq svir lrnef, naq ortng Rabf: 5:7 Naq
Frgu yvirq nsgre ur ortng Rabf rvtug uhaqerq naq frira lrnef, naq
ortng fbaf naq qnhtugref: 5:8 Naq nyy gur qnlf bs Frgu jrer avar
uhaqerq naq gjryir lrnef: naq ur qvrq.

5:9 Naq Rabf yvirq avargl lrnef, naq ortng Pnvana: 5:10 Naq Rabf yvirq
nsgre ur ortng Pnvana rvtug uhaqerq naq svsgrra lrnef, naq ortng fbaf
naq qnhtugref: 5:11 Naq nyy gur qnlf bs Rabf jrer avar uhaqerq naq
svir lrnef: naq ur qvrq.

5:12 Naq Pnvana yvirq friragl lrnef naq ortng Znunynyrry: 5:13 Naq
Pnvana yvirq nsgre ur ortng Znunynyrry rvtug uhaqerq naq sbegl lrnef,
naq ortng fbaf naq qnhtugref: 5:14 Naq nyy gur qnlf bs Pnvana jrer
avar uhaqerq naq gra lrnef: naq ur qvrq.

5:15 Naq Znunynyrry yvirq fvkgl naq svir lrnef, naq ortng Wnerq: 5:16
Naq Znunynyrry yvirq nsgre ur ortng Wnerq rvtug uhaqerq naq guvegl
lrnef, naq ortng fbaf naq qnhtugref: 5:17 Naq nyy gur qnlf bs
Znunynyrry jrer rvtug uhaqerq avargl naq svir lrnef: naq ur qvrq.

5:18 Naq Wnerq yvirq na uhaqerq fvkgl naq gjb lrnef, naq ur ortng
Rabpu: 5:19 Naq Wnerq yvirq nsgre ur ortng Rabpu rvtug uhaqerq lrnef,
naq ortng fbaf naq qnhtugref: 5:20 Naq nyy gur qnlf bs Wnerq jrer avar
uhaqerq fvkgl naq gjb lrnef: naq ur qvrq.

5:21 Naq Rabpu yvirq fvkgl naq svir lrnef, naq ortng Zrguhfrynu: 5:22
Naq Rabpu jnyxrq jvgu Tbq nsgre ur ortng Zrguhfrynu guerr uhaqerq
lrnef, naq ortng fbaf naq qnhtugref: 5:23 Naq nyy gur qnlf bs Rabpu
jrer guerr uhaqerq fvkgl naq svir lrnef: 5:24 Naq Rabpu jnyxrq jvgu
Tbq: naq ur jnf abg; sbe Tbq gbbx uvz.

5:25 Naq Zrguhfrynu yvirq na uhaqerq rvtugl naq frira lrnef, naq ortng
Ynzrpu.

5:26 Naq Zrguhfrynu yvirq nsgre ur ortng Ynzrpu frira uhaqerq rvtugl
naq gjb lrnef, naq ortng fbaf naq qnhtugref: 5:27 Naq nyy gur qnlf bs
Zrguhfrynu jrer avar uhaqerq fvkgl naq avar lrnef: naq ur qvrq.

5:28 Naq Ynzrpu yvirq na uhaqerq rvtugl naq gjb lrnef, naq ortng n
fba: 5:29 Naq ur pnyyrq uvf anzr Abnu, fnlvat, Guvf fnzr funyy pbzsbeg
hf pbapreavat bhe jbex naq gbvy bs bhe unaqf, orpnhfr bs gur tebhaq
juvpu gur YBEQ ungu phefrq.

5:30 Naq Ynzrpu yvirq nsgre ur ortng Abnu svir uhaqerq avargl naq svir
lrnef, naq ortng fbaf naq qnhtugref: 5:31 Naq nyy gur qnlf bs Ynzrpu
jrer frira uhaqerq friragl naq frira lrnef: naq ur qvrq.

5:32 Naq Abnu jnf svir uhaqerq lrnef byq: naq Abnu ortng Furz, Unz,
naq Wncurgu.

6:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura zra ortna gb zhygvcyl ba gur snpr bs gur
rnegu, naq qnhtugref jrer obea hagb gurz, 6:2 Gung gur fbaf bs Tbq fnj
gur qnhtugref bs zra gung gurl jrer snve; naq gurl gbbx gurz jvirf bs
nyy juvpu gurl pubfr.

6:3 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq, Zl fcvevg funyy abg nyjnlf fgevir jvgu zna, sbe
gung ur nyfb vf syrfu: lrg uvf qnlf funyy or na uhaqerq naq gjragl
lrnef.

6:4 Gurer jrer tvnagf va gur rnegu va gubfr qnlf; naq nyfb nsgre gung,
jura gur fbaf bs Tbq pnzr va hagb gur qnhtugref bs zra, naq gurl oner
puvyqera gb gurz, gur fnzr orpnzr zvtugl zra juvpu jrer bs byq, zra bs
erabja.

6:5 Naq Tbq fnj gung gur jvpxrqarff bs zna jnf terng va gur rnegu, naq
gung rirel vzntvangvba bs gur gubhtugf bs uvf urneg jnf bayl rivy
pbagvahnyyl.

6:6 Naq vg ercragrq gur YBEQ gung ur unq znqr zna ba gur rnegu, naq vg
tevrirq uvz ng uvf urneg.

6:7 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq, V jvyy qrfgebl zna jubz V unir perngrq sebz gur
snpr bs gur rnegu; obgu zna, naq ornfg, naq gur perrcvat guvat, naq
gur sbjyf bs gur nve; sbe vg ercragrgu zr gung V unir znqr gurz.

6:8 Ohg Abnu sbhaq tenpr va gur rlrf bs gur YBEQ.

6:9 Gurfr ner gur trarengvbaf bs Abnu: Abnu jnf n whfg zna naq cresrpg
va uvf trarengvbaf, naq Abnu jnyxrq jvgu Tbq.

6:10 Naq Abnu ortng guerr fbaf, Furz, Unz, naq Wncurgu.

6:11 Gur rnegu nyfb jnf pbeehcg orsber Tbq, naq gur rnegu jnf svyyrq
jvgu ivbyrapr.

6:12 Naq Tbq ybbxrq hcba gur rnegu, naq, orubyq, vg jnf pbeehcg; sbe
nyy syrfu unq pbeehcgrq uvf jnl hcba gur rnegu.

6:13 Naq Tbq fnvq hagb Abnu, Gur raq bs nyy syrfu vf pbzr orsber zr;
sbe gur rnegu vf svyyrq jvgu ivbyrapr guebhtu gurz; naq, orubyq, V
jvyy qrfgebl gurz jvgu gur rnegu.

6:14 Znxr gurr na nex bs tbcure jbbq; ebbzf funyg gubh znxr va gur
nex, naq funyg cvgpu vg jvguva naq jvgubhg jvgu cvgpu.

6:15 Naq guvf vf gur snfuvba juvpu gubh funyg znxr vg bs: Gur yratgu
bs gur nex funyy or guerr uhaqerq phovgf, gur oernqgu bs vg svsgl
phovgf, naq gur urvtug bs vg guvegl phovgf.

6:16 N jvaqbj funyg gubh znxr gb gur nex, naq va n phovg funyg gubh
svavfu vg nobir; naq gur qbbe bs gur nex funyg gubh frg va gur fvqr
gurerbs; jvgu ybjre, frpbaq, naq guveq fgbevrf funyg gubh znxr vg.

6:17 Naq, orubyq, V, rira V, qb oevat n sybbq bs jngref hcba gur
rnegu, gb qrfgebl nyy syrfu, jurerva vf gur oerngu bs yvsr, sebz haqre
urnira; naq rirel guvat gung vf va gur rnegu funyy qvr.

6:18 Ohg jvgu gurr jvyy V rfgnoyvfu zl pbiranag; naq gubh funyg pbzr
vagb gur nex, gubh, naq gul fbaf, naq gul jvsr, naq gul fbaf' jvirf
jvgu gurr.

6:19 Naq bs rirel yvivat guvat bs nyy syrfu, gjb bs rirel fbeg funyg
gubh oevat vagb gur nex, gb xrrc gurz nyvir jvgu gurr; gurl funyy or
znyr naq srznyr.

6:20 Bs sbjyf nsgre gurve xvaq, naq bs pnggyr nsgre gurve xvaq, bs
rirel perrcvat guvat bs gur rnegu nsgre uvf xvaq, gjb bs rirel fbeg
funyy pbzr hagb gurr, gb xrrc gurz nyvir.

6:21 Naq gnxr gubh hagb gurr bs nyy sbbq gung vf rngra, naq gubh funyg
tngure vg gb gurr; naq vg funyy or sbe sbbq sbe gurr, naq sbe gurz.

6:22 Guhf qvq Abnu; nppbeqvat gb nyy gung Tbq pbzznaqrq uvz, fb qvq
ur.

7:1 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Abnu, Pbzr gubh naq nyy gul ubhfr vagb gur
nex; sbe gurr unir V frra evtugrbhf orsber zr va guvf trarengvba.

7:2 Bs rirel pyrna ornfg gubh funyg gnxr gb gurr ol friraf, gur znyr
naq uvf srznyr: naq bs ornfgf gung ner abg pyrna ol gjb, gur znyr naq
uvf srznyr.

7:3 Bs sbjyf nyfb bs gur nve ol friraf, gur znyr naq gur srznyr; gb
xrrc frrq nyvir hcba gur snpr bs nyy gur rnegu.

7:4 Sbe lrg frira qnlf, naq V jvyy pnhfr vg gb enva hcba gur rnegu
sbegl qnlf naq sbegl avtugf; naq rirel yvivat fhofgnapr gung V unir
znqr jvyy V qrfgebl sebz bss gur snpr bs gur rnegu.

7:5 Naq Abnu qvq nppbeqvat hagb nyy gung gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq uvz.

7:6 Naq Abnu jnf fvk uhaqerq lrnef byq jura gur sybbq bs jngref jnf
hcba gur rnegu.

7:7 Naq Abnu jrag va, naq uvf fbaf, naq uvf jvsr, naq uvf fbaf' jvirf
jvgu uvz, vagb gur nex, orpnhfr bs gur jngref bs gur sybbq.

7:8 Bs pyrna ornfgf, naq bs ornfgf gung ner abg pyrna, naq bs sbjyf,
naq bs rirel guvat gung perrcrgu hcba gur rnegu, 7:9 Gurer jrag va gjb
naq gjb hagb Abnu vagb gur nex, gur znyr naq gur srznyr, nf Tbq unq
pbzznaqrq Abnu.

7:10 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre frira qnlf, gung gur jngref bs gur
sybbq jrer hcba gur rnegu.

7:11 Va gur fvk uhaqerqgu lrne bs Abnu'f yvsr, va gur frpbaq zbagu,
gur friragrragu qnl bs gur zbagu, gur fnzr qnl jrer nyy gur sbhagnvaf
bs gur terng qrrc oebxra hc, naq gur jvaqbjf bs urnira jrer bcrarq.

7:12 Naq gur enva jnf hcba gur rnegu sbegl qnlf naq sbegl avtugf.

7:13 Va gur frysfnzr qnl ragrerq Abnu, naq Furz, naq Unz, naq Wncurgu,
gur fbaf bs Abnu, naq Abnu'f jvsr, naq gur guerr jvirf bs uvf fbaf
jvgu gurz, vagb gur nex; 7:14 Gurl, naq rirel ornfg nsgre uvf xvaq,
naq nyy gur pnggyr nsgre gurve xvaq, naq rirel perrcvat guvat gung
perrcrgu hcba gur rnegu nsgre uvf xvaq, naq rirel sbjy nsgre uvf xvaq,
rirel oveq bs rirel fbeg.

7:15 Naq gurl jrag va hagb Abnu vagb gur nex, gjb naq gjb bs nyy
syrfu, jurerva vf gur oerngu bs yvsr.

7:16 Naq gurl gung jrag va, jrag va znyr naq srznyr bs nyy syrfu, nf
Tbq unq pbzznaqrq uvz: naq gur YBEQ fuhg uvz va.

7:17 Naq gur sybbq jnf sbegl qnlf hcba gur rnegu; naq gur jngref
vapernfrq, naq oner hc gur nex, naq vg jnf yvsg hc nobir gur rnegu.

7:18 Naq gur jngref cerinvyrq, naq jrer vapernfrq terngyl hcba gur
rnegu; naq gur nex jrag hcba gur snpr bs gur jngref.

7:19 Naq gur jngref cerinvyrq rkprrqvatyl hcba gur rnegu; naq nyy gur
uvtu uvyyf, gung jrer haqre gur jubyr urnira, jrer pbirerq.

7:20 Svsgrra phovgf hcjneq qvq gur jngref cerinvy; naq gur zbhagnvaf
jrer pbirerq.

7:21 Naq nyy syrfu qvrq gung zbirq hcba gur rnegu, obgu bs sbjy, naq
bs pnggyr, naq bs ornfg, naq bs rirel perrcvat guvat gung perrcrgu
hcba gur rnegu, naq rirel zna: 7:22 Nyy va jubfr abfgevyf jnf gur
oerngu bs yvsr, bs nyy gung jnf va gur qel ynaq, qvrq.

7:23 Naq rirel yvivat fhofgnapr jnf qrfgeblrq juvpu jnf hcba gur snpr
bs gur tebhaq, obgu zna, naq pnggyr, naq gur perrcvat guvatf, naq gur
sbjy bs gur urnira; naq gurl jrer qrfgeblrq sebz gur rnegu: naq Abnu
bayl erznvarq nyvir, naq gurl gung jrer jvgu uvz va gur nex.

7:24 Naq gur jngref cerinvyrq hcba gur rnegu na uhaqerq naq svsgl
qnlf.

8:1 Naq Tbq erzrzorerq Abnu, naq rirel yvivat guvat, naq nyy gur
pnggyr gung jnf jvgu uvz va gur nex: naq Tbq znqr n jvaq gb cnff bire
gur rnegu, naq gur jngref nffjntrq; 8:2 Gur sbhagnvaf nyfb bs gur qrrc
naq gur jvaqbjf bs urnira jrer fgbccrq, naq gur enva sebz urnira jnf
erfgenvarq; 8:3 Naq gur jngref erghearq sebz bss gur rnegu
pbagvahnyyl: naq nsgre gur raq bs gur uhaqerq naq svsgl qnlf gur
jngref jrer nongrq.

8:4 Naq gur nex erfgrq va gur friragu zbagu, ba gur friragrragu qnl bs
gur zbagu, hcba gur zbhagnvaf bs Neneng.

8:5 Naq gur jngref qrpernfrq pbagvahnyyl hagvy gur gragu zbagu: va gur
gragu zbagu, ba gur svefg qnl bs gur zbagu, jrer gur gbcf bs gur
zbhagnvaf frra.

8:6 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng gur raq bs sbegl qnlf, gung Abnu bcrarq gur
jvaqbj bs gur nex juvpu ur unq znqr: 8:7 Naq ur frag sbegu n enira,
juvpu jrag sbegu gb naq seb, hagvy gur jngref jrer qevrq hc sebz bss
gur rnegu.

8:8 Nyfb ur frag sbegu n qbir sebz uvz, gb frr vs gur jngref jrer
nongrq sebz bss gur snpr bs gur tebhaq; 8:9 Ohg gur qbir sbhaq ab erfg
sbe gur fbyr bs ure sbbg, naq fur erghearq hagb uvz vagb gur nex, sbe
gur jngref jrer ba gur snpr bs gur jubyr rnegu: gura ur chg sbegu uvf
unaq, naq gbbx ure, naq chyyrq ure va hagb uvz vagb gur nex.

8:10 Naq ur fgnlrq lrg bgure frira qnlf; naq ntnva ur frag sbegu gur
qbir bhg bs gur nex; 8:11 Naq gur qbir pnzr va gb uvz va gur riravat;
naq, yb, va ure zbhgu jnf na byvir yrns cyhpxg bss: fb Abnu xarj gung
gur jngref jrer nongrq sebz bss gur rnegu.

8:12 Naq ur fgnlrq lrg bgure frira qnlf; naq frag sbegu gur qbir;
juvpu erghearq abg ntnva hagb uvz nal zber.

8:13 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gur fvk uhaqerqgu naq svefg lrne, va gur
svefg zbagu, gur svefg qnl bs gur zbagu, gur jngref jrer qevrq hc sebz
bss gur rnegu: naq Abnu erzbirq gur pbirevat bs gur nex, naq ybbxrq,
naq, orubyq, gur snpr bs gur tebhaq jnf qel.

8:14 Naq va gur frpbaq zbagu, ba gur frira naq gjragvrgu qnl bs gur
zbagu, jnf gur rnegu qevrq.

8:15 Naq Tbq fcnxr hagb Abnu, fnlvat, 8:16 Tb sbegu bs gur nex, gubh,
naq gul jvsr, naq gul fbaf, naq gul fbaf' jvirf jvgu gurr.

8:17 Oevat sbegu jvgu gurr rirel yvivat guvat gung vf jvgu gurr, bs
nyy syrfu, obgu bs sbjy, naq bs pnggyr, naq bs rirel perrcvat guvat
gung perrcrgu hcba gur rnegu; gung gurl znl oerrq nohaqnagyl va gur
rnegu, naq or sehvgshy, naq zhygvcyl hcba gur rnegu.

8:18 Naq Abnu jrag sbegu, naq uvf fbaf, naq uvf jvsr, naq uvf fbaf'
jvirf jvgu uvz: 8:19 Rirel ornfg, rirel perrcvat guvat, naq rirel
sbjy, naq jungfbrire perrcrgu hcba gur rnegu, nsgre gurve xvaqf, jrag
sbegu bhg bs gur nex.

8:20 Naq Abnu ohvyqrq na nygne hagb gur YBEQ; naq gbbx bs rirel pyrna
ornfg, naq bs rirel pyrna sbjy, naq bssrerq oheag bssrevatf ba gur
nygne.

8:21 Naq gur YBEQ fzryyrq n fjrrg fnibhe; naq gur YBEQ fnvq va uvf
urneg, V jvyy abg ntnva phefr gur tebhaq nal zber sbe zna'f fnxr; sbe
gur vzntvangvba bs zna'f urneg vf rivy sebz uvf lbhgu; arvgure jvyy V
ntnva fzvgr nal zber rirel guvat yvivat, nf V unir qbar.

8:22 Juvyr gur rnegu erznvargu, frrqgvzr naq uneirfg, naq pbyq naq
urng, naq fhzzre naq jvagre, naq qnl naq avtug funyy abg prnfr.

9:1 Naq Tbq oyrffrq Abnu naq uvf fbaf, naq fnvq hagb gurz, Or
sehvgshy, naq zhygvcyl, naq ercyravfu gur rnegu.

9:2 Naq gur srne bs lbh naq gur qernq bs lbh funyy or hcba rirel ornfg
bs gur rnegu, naq hcba rirel sbjy bs gur nve, hcba nyy gung zbirgu
hcba gur rnegu, naq hcba nyy gur svfurf bs gur frn; vagb lbhe unaq ner
gurl qryvirerq.

9:3 Rirel zbivat guvat gung yvirgu funyy or zrng sbe lbh; rira nf gur
terra ureo unir V tvira lbh nyy guvatf.

9:4 Ohg syrfu jvgu gur yvsr gurerbs, juvpu vf gur oybbq gurerbs, funyy
lr abg rng.

9:5 Naq fheryl lbhe oybbq bs lbhe yvirf jvyy V erdhver; ng gur unaq bs
rirel ornfg jvyy V erdhver vg, naq ng gur unaq bs zna; ng gur unaq bs
rirel zna'f oebgure jvyy V erdhver gur yvsr bs zna.

9:6 Jubfb furqqrgu zna'f oybbq, ol zna funyy uvf oybbq or furq: sbe va
gur vzntr bs Tbq znqr ur zna.

9:7 Naq lbh, or lr sehvgshy, naq zhygvcyl; oevat sbegu nohaqnagyl va
gur rnegu, naq zhygvcyl gurerva.

9:8 Naq Tbq fcnxr hagb Abnu, naq gb uvf fbaf jvgu uvz, fnlvat, 9:9 Naq
V, orubyq, V rfgnoyvfu zl pbiranag jvgu lbh, naq jvgu lbhe frrq nsgre
lbh; 9:10 Naq jvgu rirel yvivat perngher gung vf jvgu lbh, bs gur
sbjy, bs gur pnggyr, naq bs rirel ornfg bs gur rnegu jvgu lbh; sebz
nyy gung tb bhg bs gur nex, gb rirel ornfg bs gur rnegu.

9:11 Naq V jvyy rfgnoyvfu zl pbiranag jvgu lbh, arvgure funyy nyy
syrfu or phg bss nal zber ol gur jngref bs n sybbq; arvgure funyy
gurer nal zber or n sybbq gb qrfgebl gur rnegu.

9:12 Naq Tbq fnvq, Guvf vf gur gbxra bs gur pbiranag juvpu V znxr
orgjrra zr naq lbh naq rirel yvivat perngher gung vf jvgu lbh, sbe
crecrghny trarengvbaf: 9:13 V qb frg zl obj va gur pybhq, naq vg funyy
or sbe n gbxra bs n pbiranag orgjrra zr naq gur rnegu.

9:14 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, jura V oevat n pybhq bire gur rnegu,
gung gur obj funyy or frra va gur pybhq: 9:15 Naq V jvyy erzrzore zl
pbiranag, juvpu vf orgjrra zr naq lbh naq rirel yvivat perngher bs nyy
syrfu; naq gur jngref funyy ab zber orpbzr n sybbq gb qrfgebl nyy
syrfu.

9:16 Naq gur obj funyy or va gur pybhq; naq V jvyy ybbx hcba vg, gung
V znl erzrzore gur rireynfgvat pbiranag orgjrra Tbq naq rirel yvivat
perngher bs nyy syrfu gung vf hcba gur rnegu.

9:17 Naq Tbq fnvq hagb Abnu, Guvf vf gur gbxra bs gur pbiranag, juvpu
V unir rfgnoyvfurq orgjrra zr naq nyy syrfu gung vf hcba gur rnegu.

9:18 Naq gur fbaf bs Abnu, gung jrag sbegu bs gur nex, jrer Furz, naq
Unz, naq Wncurgu: naq Unz vf gur sngure bs Pnanna.

9:19 Gurfr ner gur guerr fbaf bs Abnu: naq bs gurz jnf gur jubyr rnegu
birefcernq.

9:20 Naq Abnu ortna gb or na uhfonaqzna, naq ur cynagrq n ivarlneq:
9:21 Naq ur qenax bs gur jvar, naq jnf qehaxra; naq ur jnf hapbirerq
jvguva uvf grag.

9:22 Naq Unz, gur sngure bs Pnanna, fnj gur anxrqarff bs uvf sngure,
naq gbyq uvf gjb oerguera jvgubhg.

9:23 Naq Furz naq Wncurgu gbbx n tnezrag, naq ynvq vg hcba obgu gurve
fubhyqref, naq jrag onpxjneq, naq pbirerq gur anxrqarff bs gurve
sngure; naq gurve snprf jrer onpxjneq, naq gurl fnj abg gurve sngure'f
anxrqarff.

9:24 Naq Abnu njbxr sebz uvf jvar, naq xarj jung uvf lbhatre fba unq
qbar hagb uvz.

9:25 Naq ur fnvq, Phefrq or Pnanna; n freinag bs freinagf funyy ur or
hagb uvf oerguera.

9:26 Naq ur fnvq, Oyrffrq or gur YBEQ Tbq bs Furz; naq Pnanna funyy or
uvf freinag.

9:27 Tbq funyy raynetr Wncurgu, naq ur funyy qjryy va gur gragf bs
Furz; naq Pnanna funyy or uvf freinag.

9:28 Naq Abnu yvirq nsgre gur sybbq guerr uhaqerq naq svsgl lrnef.

9:29 Naq nyy gur qnlf bs Abnu jrer avar uhaqerq naq svsgl lrnef: naq
ur qvrq.

10:1 Abj gurfr ner gur trarengvbaf bs gur fbaf bs Abnu, Furz, Unz, naq
Wncurgu: naq hagb gurz jrer fbaf obea nsgre gur sybbq.

10:2 Gur fbaf bs Wncurgu; Tbzre, naq Zntbt, naq Znqnv, naq Wnina, naq
Ghony, naq Zrfurpu, naq Gvenf.

10:3 Naq gur fbaf bs Tbzre; Nfuxranm, naq Evcungu, naq Gbtneznu.

10:4 Naq gur fbaf bs Wnina; Ryvfunu, naq Gnefuvfu, Xvggvz, naq
Qbqnavz.

10:5 Ol gurfr jrer gur vfyrf bs gur Tragvyrf qvivqrq va gurve ynaqf;
rirel bar nsgre uvf gbathr, nsgre gurve snzvyvrf, va gurve angvbaf.

10:6 Naq gur fbaf bs Unz; Phfu, naq Zvmenvz, naq Cuhg, naq Pnanna.

10:7 Naq gur fbaf bs Phfu; Fron, naq Univynu, naq Fnognu, naq Ennznu,
naq Fnogrpunu: naq gur fbaf bs Ennznu; Furon, naq Qrqna.

10:8 Naq Phfu ortng Avzebq: ur ortna gb or n zvtugl bar va gur rnegu.

10:9 Ur jnf n zvtugl uhagre orsber gur YBEQ: jurersber vg vf fnvq,
Rira nf Avzebq gur zvtugl uhagre orsber gur YBEQ.

10:10 Naq gur ortvaavat bs uvf xvatqbz jnf Onory, naq Rerpu, naq
Nppnq, naq Pnyaru, va gur ynaq bs Fuvane.

10:11 Bhg bs gung ynaq jrag sbegu Nffuhe, naq ohvyqrq Avariru, naq gur
pvgl Erubobgu, naq Pnynu, 10:12 Naq Erfra orgjrra Avariru naq Pnynu:
gur fnzr vf n terng pvgl.

10:13 Naq Zvmenvz ortng Yhqvz, naq Nanzvz, naq Yrunovz, naq Ancughuvz,
10:14 Naq Cnguehfvz, naq Pnfyhuvz, (bhg bs jubz pnzr Cuvyvfgvz,) naq
Pncugbevz.

10:15 Naq Pnanna ortng Fvqba uvf svefg obea, naq Urgu, 10:16 Naq gur
Wrohfvgr, naq gur Nzbevgr, naq gur Tvetnfvgr, 10:17 Naq gur Uvivgr,
naq gur Nexvgr, naq gur Fvavgr, 10:18 Naq gur Neinqvgr, naq gur
Mrznevgr, naq gur Unznguvgr: naq nsgrejneq jrer gur snzvyvrf bs gur
Pnannavgrf fcernq noebnq.

10:19 Naq gur obeqre bs gur Pnannavgrf jnf sebz Fvqba, nf gubh pbzrfg
gb Trene, hagb Tnmn; nf gubh tbrfg, hagb Fbqbz, naq Tbzbeenu, naq
Nqznu, naq Mrobvz, rira hagb Ynfun.

10:20 Gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Unz, nsgre gurve snzvyvrf, nsgre gurve
gbathrf, va gurve pbhagevrf, naq va gurve angvbaf.

10:21 Hagb Furz nyfb, gur sngure bs nyy gur puvyqera bs Rore, gur
oebgure bs Wncurgu gur ryqre, rira gb uvz jrer puvyqera obea.

10:22 Gur puvyqera bs Furz; Rynz, naq Nffuhe, naq Necunknq, naq Yhq,
naq Nenz.

10:23 Naq gur puvyqera bs Nenz; Hm, naq Uhy, naq Trgure, naq Znfu.

10:24 Naq Necunknq ortng Fnynu; naq Fnynu ortng Rore.

10:25 Naq hagb Rore jrer obea gjb fbaf: gur anzr bs bar jnf Cryrt; sbe
va uvf qnlf jnf gur rnegu qvivqrq; naq uvf oebgure'f anzr jnf Wbxgna.

10:26 Naq Wbxgna ortng Nyzbqnq, naq Furyrcu, naq Unmneznirgu, naq
Wrenu, 10:27 Naq Unqbenz, naq Hmny, naq Qvxynu, 10:28 Naq Bony, naq
Novznry, naq Furon, 10:29 Naq Bcuve, naq Univynu, naq Wbono: nyy gurfr
jrer gur fbaf bs Wbxgna.

10:30 Naq gurve qjryyvat jnf sebz Zrfun, nf gubh tbrfg hagb Frcune n
zbhag bs gur rnfg.

10:31 Gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Furz, nsgre gurve snzvyvrf, nsgre gurve
gbathrf, va gurve ynaqf, nsgre gurve angvbaf.

10:32 Gurfr ner gur snzvyvrf bs gur fbaf bs Abnu, nsgre gurve
trarengvbaf, va gurve angvbaf: naq ol gurfr jrer gur angvbaf qvivqrq
va gur rnegu nsgre gur sybbq.

11:1 Naq gur jubyr rnegu jnf bs bar ynathntr, naq bs bar fcrrpu.

11:2 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf gurl wbhearlrq sebz gur rnfg, gung gurl
sbhaq n cynva va gur ynaq bs Fuvane; naq gurl qjryg gurer.

11:3 Naq gurl fnvq bar gb nabgure, Tb gb, yrg hf znxr oevpx, naq ohea
gurz gubebhtuyl. Naq gurl unq oevpx sbe fgbar, naq fyvzr unq gurl sbe
zbegre.

11:4 Naq gurl fnvq, Tb gb, yrg hf ohvyq hf n pvgl naq n gbjre, jubfr
gbc znl ernpu hagb urnira; naq yrg hf znxr hf n anzr, yrfg jr or
fpnggrerq noebnq hcba gur snpr bs gur jubyr rnegu.

11:5 Naq gur YBEQ pnzr qbja gb frr gur pvgl naq gur gbjre, juvpu gur
puvyqera bs zra ohvyqrq.

11:6 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq, Orubyq, gur crbcyr vf bar, naq gurl unir nyy
bar ynathntr; naq guvf gurl ortva gb qb: naq abj abguvat jvyy or
erfgenvarq sebz gurz, juvpu gurl unir vzntvarq gb qb.

11:7 Tb gb, yrg hf tb qbja, naq gurer pbasbhaq gurve ynathntr, gung
gurl znl abg haqrefgnaq bar nabgure'f fcrrpu.

11:8 Fb gur YBEQ fpnggrerq gurz noebnq sebz gurapr hcba gur snpr bs
nyy gur rnegu: naq gurl yrsg bss gb ohvyq gur pvgl.

11:9 Gurersber vf gur anzr bs vg pnyyrq Onory; orpnhfr gur YBEQ qvq
gurer pbasbhaq gur ynathntr bs nyy gur rnegu: naq sebz gurapr qvq gur
YBEQ fpnggre gurz noebnq hcba gur snpr bs nyy gur rnegu.

11:10 Gurfr ner gur trarengvbaf bs Furz: Furz jnf na uhaqerq lrnef
byq, naq ortng Necunknq gjb lrnef nsgre gur sybbq: 11:11 Naq Furz
yvirq nsgre ur ortng Necunknq svir uhaqerq lrnef, naq ortng fbaf naq
qnhtugref.

11:12 Naq Necunknq yvirq svir naq guvegl lrnef, naq ortng Fnynu: 11:13
Naq Necunknq yvirq nsgre ur ortng Fnynu sbhe uhaqerq naq guerr lrnef,
naq ortng fbaf naq qnhtugref.

11:14 Naq Fnynu yvirq guvegl lrnef, naq ortng Rore: 11:15 Naq Fnynu
yvirq nsgre ur ortng Rore sbhe uhaqerq naq guerr lrnef, naq ortng fbaf
naq qnhtugref.

11:16 Naq Rore yvirq sbhe naq guvegl lrnef, naq ortng Cryrt: 11:17 Naq
Rore yvirq nsgre ur ortng Cryrt sbhe uhaqerq naq guvegl lrnef, naq
ortng fbaf naq qnhtugref.

11:18 Naq Cryrt yvirq guvegl lrnef, naq ortng Erh: 11:19 Naq Cryrt
yvirq nsgre ur ortng Erh gjb uhaqerq naq avar lrnef, naq ortng fbaf
naq qnhtugref.

11:20 Naq Erh yvirq gjb naq guvegl lrnef, naq ortng Freht: 11:21 Naq
Erh yvirq nsgre ur ortng Freht gjb uhaqerq naq frira lrnef, naq ortng
fbaf naq qnhtugref.

11:22 Naq Freht yvirq guvegl lrnef, naq ortng Anube: 11:23 Naq Freht
yvirq nsgre ur ortng Anube gjb uhaqerq lrnef, naq ortng fbaf naq
qnhtugref.

11:24 Naq Anube yvirq avar naq gjragl lrnef, naq ortng Grenu: 11:25
Naq Anube yvirq nsgre ur ortng Grenu na uhaqerq naq avargrra lrnef,
naq ortng fbaf naq qnhtugref.

11:26 Naq Grenu yvirq friragl lrnef, naq ortng Noenz, Anube, naq
Unena.

11:27 Abj gurfr ner gur trarengvbaf bs Grenu: Grenu ortng Noenz,
Anube, naq Unena; naq Unena ortng Ybg.

11:28 Naq Unena qvrq orsber uvf sngure Grenu va gur ynaq bs uvf
angvivgl, va He bs gur Punyqrrf.

11:29 Naq Noenz naq Anube gbbx gurz jvirf: gur anzr bs Noenz'f jvsr
jnf Fnenv; naq gur anzr bs Anube'f jvsr, Zvypnu, gur qnhtugre bs
Unena, gur sngure bs Zvypnu, naq gur sngure bs Vfpnu.

11:30 Ohg Fnenv jnf oneera; fur unq ab puvyq.

11:31 Naq Grenu gbbx Noenz uvf fba, naq Ybg gur fba bs Unena uvf fba'f
fba, naq Fnenv uvf qnhtugre va ynj, uvf fba Noenz'f jvsr; naq gurl
jrag sbegu jvgu gurz sebz He bs gur Punyqrrf, gb tb vagb gur ynaq bs
Pnanna; naq gurl pnzr hagb Unena, naq qjryg gurer.

11:32 Naq gur qnlf bs Grenu jrer gjb uhaqerq naq svir lrnef: naq Grenu
qvrq va Unena.

12:1 Abj gur YBEQ unq fnvq hagb Noenz, Trg gurr bhg bs gul pbhagel,
naq sebz gul xvaqerq, naq sebz gul sngure'f ubhfr, hagb n ynaq gung V
jvyy furj gurr: 12:2 Naq V jvyy znxr bs gurr n terng angvba, naq V
jvyy oyrff gurr, naq znxr gul anzr terng; naq gubh funyg or n
oyrffvat: 12:3 Naq V jvyy oyrff gurz gung oyrff gurr, naq phefr uvz
gung phefrgu gurr: naq va gurr funyy nyy snzvyvrf bs gur rnegu or
oyrffrq.

12:4 Fb Noenz qrcnegrq, nf gur YBEQ unq fcbxra hagb uvz; naq Ybg jrag
jvgu uvz: naq Noenz jnf friragl naq svir lrnef byq jura ur qrcnegrq
bhg bs Unena.

12:5 Naq Noenz gbbx Fnenv uvf jvsr, naq Ybg uvf oebgure'f fba, naq nyy
gurve fhofgnapr gung gurl unq tngurerq, naq gur fbhyf gung gurl unq
tbggra va Unena; naq gurl jrag sbegu gb tb vagb gur ynaq bs Pnanna;
naq vagb gur ynaq bs Pnanna gurl pnzr.

12:6 Naq Noenz cnffrq guebhtu gur ynaq hagb gur cynpr bs Fvpurz, hagb
gur cynva bs Zberu. Naq gur Pnannavgr jnf gura va gur ynaq.

12:7 Naq gur YBEQ nccrnerq hagb Noenz, naq fnvq, Hagb gul frrq jvyy V
tvir guvf ynaq: naq gurer ohvyqrq ur na nygne hagb gur YBEQ, jub
nccrnerq hagb uvz.

12:8 Naq ur erzbirq sebz gurapr hagb n zbhagnva ba gur rnfg bs Orgury,
naq cvgpurq uvf grag, univat Orgury ba gur jrfg, naq Unv ba gur rnfg:
naq gurer ur ohvyqrq na nygne hagb gur YBEQ, naq pnyyrq hcba gur anzr
bs gur YBEQ.

12:9 Naq Noenz wbhearlrq, tbvat ba fgvyy gbjneq gur fbhgu.

12:10 Naq gurer jnf n snzvar va gur ynaq: naq Noenz jrag qbja vagb
Rtlcg gb fbwbhea gurer; sbe gur snzvar jnf tevribhf va gur ynaq.

12:11 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura ur jnf pbzr arne gb ragre vagb Rtlcg,
gung ur fnvq hagb Fnenv uvf jvsr, Orubyq abj, V xabj gung gubh neg n
snve jbzna gb ybbx hcba: 12:12 Gurersber vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, jura
gur Rtlcgvnaf funyy frr gurr, gung gurl funyy fnl, Guvf vf uvf jvsr:
naq gurl jvyy xvyy zr, ohg gurl jvyy fnir gurr nyvir.

12:13 Fnl, V cenl gurr, gubh neg zl fvfgre: gung vg znl or jryy jvgu
zr sbe gul fnxr; naq zl fbhy funyy yvir orpnhfr bs gurr.

12:14 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung, jura Noenz jnf pbzr vagb Rtlcg, gur
Rtlcgvnaf oruryq gur jbzna gung fur jnf irel snve.

12:15 Gur cevaprf nyfb bs Cunenbu fnj ure, naq pbzzraqrq ure orsber
Cunenbu: naq gur jbzna jnf gnxra vagb Cunenbu'f ubhfr.

12:16 Naq ur ragerngrq Noenz jryy sbe ure fnxr: naq ur unq furrc, naq
bkra, naq ur nffrf, naq zrafreinagf, naq znvqfreinagf, naq fur nffrf,
naq pnzryf.

12:17 Naq gur YBEQ cynthrq Cunenbu naq uvf ubhfr jvgu terng cynthrf
orpnhfr bs Fnenv Noenz'f jvsr.

12:18 Naq Cunenbu pnyyrq Noenz naq fnvq, Jung vf guvf gung gubh unfg
qbar hagb zr? jul qvqfg gubh abg gryy zr gung fur jnf gul jvsr?  12:19
Jul fnvqfg gubh, Fur vf zl fvfgre? fb V zvtug unir gnxra ure gb zr gb
jvsr: abj gurersber orubyq gul jvsr, gnxr ure, naq tb gul jnl.

12:20 Naq Cunenbu pbzznaqrq uvf zra pbapreavat uvz: naq gurl frag uvz
njnl, naq uvf jvsr, naq nyy gung ur unq.

13:1 Naq Noenz jrag hc bhg bs Rtlcg, ur, naq uvf jvsr, naq nyy gung ur
unq, naq Ybg jvgu uvz, vagb gur fbhgu.

13:2 Naq Noenz jnf irel evpu va pnggyr, va fvyire, naq va tbyq.

13:3 Naq ur jrag ba uvf wbhearlf sebz gur fbhgu rira gb Orgury, hagb
gur cynpr jurer uvf grag unq orra ng gur ortvaavat, orgjrra Orgury naq
Unv; 13:4 Hagb gur cynpr bs gur nygne, juvpu ur unq znxr gurer ng gur
svefg: naq gurer Noenz pnyyrq ba gur anzr bs gur YBEQ.

13:5 Naq Ybg nyfb, juvpu jrag jvgu Noenz, unq sybpxf, naq ureqf, naq
gragf.

13:6 Naq gur ynaq jnf abg noyr gb orne gurz, gung gurl zvtug qjryy
gbtrgure: sbe gurve fhofgnapr jnf terng, fb gung gurl pbhyq abg qjryy
gbtrgure.

13:7 Naq gurer jnf n fgevsr orgjrra gur ureqzra bs Noenz'f pnggyr naq
gur ureqzra bs Ybg'f pnggyr: naq gur Pnannavgr naq gur Crevmmvgr
qjryyrq gura va gur ynaq.

13:8 Naq Noenz fnvq hagb Ybg, Yrg gurer or ab fgevsr, V cenl gurr,
orgjrra zr naq gurr, naq orgjrra zl ureqzra naq gul ureqzra; sbe jr or
oerguera.

13:9 Vf abg gur jubyr ynaq orsber gurr? frcnengr gulfrys, V cenl gurr,
sebz zr: vs gubh jvyg gnxr gur yrsg unaq, gura V jvyy tb gb gur evtug;
be vs gubh qrcneg gb gur evtug unaq, gura V jvyy tb gb gur yrsg.

13:10 Naq Ybg yvsgrq hc uvf rlrf, naq oruryq nyy gur cynva bs Wbeqna,
gung vg jnf jryy jngrerq rirel jurer, orsber gur YBEQ qrfgeblrq Fbqbz
naq Tbzbeenu, rira nf gur tneqra bs gur YBEQ, yvxr gur ynaq bs Rtlcg,
nf gubh pbzrfg hagb Mbne.

13:11 Gura Ybg pubfr uvz nyy gur cynva bs Wbeqna; naq Ybg wbhearlrq
rnfg: naq gurl frcnengrq gurzfryirf gur bar sebz gur bgure.

13:12 Noenz qjryyrq va gur ynaq bs Pnanna, naq Ybg qjryyrq va gur
pvgvrf bs gur cynva, naq cvgpurq uvf grag gbjneq Fbqbz.

13:13 Ohg gur zra bs Fbqbz jrer jvpxrq naq fvaaref orsber gur YBEQ
rkprrqvatyl.

13:14 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Noenz, nsgre gung Ybg jnf frcnengrq sebz
uvz, Yvsg hc abj guvar rlrf, naq ybbx sebz gur cynpr jurer gubh neg
abegujneq, naq fbhgujneq, naq rnfgjneq, naq jrfgjneq: 13:15 Sbe nyy
gur ynaq juvpu gubh frrfg, gb gurr jvyy V tvir vg, naq gb gul frrq sbe
rire.

13:16 Naq V jvyy znxr gul frrq nf gur qhfg bs gur rnegu: fb gung vs n
zna pna ahzore gur qhfg bs gur rnegu, gura funyy gul frrq nyfb or
ahzorerq.

13:17 Nevfr, jnyx guebhtu gur ynaq va gur yratgu bs vg naq va gur
oernqgu bs vg; sbe V jvyy tvir vg hagb gurr.

13:18 Gura Noenz erzbirq uvf grag, naq pnzr naq qjryg va gur cynva bs
Znzer, juvpu vf va Uroeba, naq ohvyg gurer na nygne hagb gur YBEQ.

14:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gur qnlf bs Nzencury xvat bs Fuvane,
Nevbpu xvat bs Ryynfne, Purqbeynbzre xvat bs Rynz, naq Gvqny xvat bs
angvbaf; 14:2 Gung gurfr znqr jne jvgu Oren xvat bs Fbqbz, naq jvgu
Ovefun xvat bs Tbzbeenu, Fuvano xvat bs Nqznu, naq Furzrore xvat bs
Mrobvvz, naq gur xvat bs Oryn, juvpu vf Mbne.

14:3 Nyy gurfr jrer wbvarq gbtrgure va gur inyr bs Fvqqvz, juvpu vf
gur fnyg frn.

14:4 Gjryir lrnef gurl freirq Purqbeynbzre, naq va gur guvegrragu lrne
gurl eroryyrq.

14:5 Naq va gur sbhegrragu lrne pnzr Purqbeynbzre, naq gur xvatf gung
jrer jvgu uvz, naq fzbgr gur Ercunvzf va Nfugrebgu Xneanvz, naq gur
Mhmvzf va Unz, naq gur Rzvaf va Funiru Xvevngunvz, 14:6 Naq gur
Ubevgrf va gurve zbhag Frve, hagb Rycnena, juvpu vf ol gur jvyqrearff.

14:7 Naq gurl erghearq, naq pnzr gb Razvfucng, juvpu vf Xnqrfu, naq
fzbgr nyy gur pbhagel bs gur Nznyrxvgrf, naq nyfb gur Nzbevgrf, gung
qjryg va Unmrmbagnzne.

14:8 Naq gurer jrag bhg gur xvat bs Fbqbz, naq gur xvat bs Tbzbeenu,
naq gur xvat bs Nqznu, naq gur xvat bs Mrobvvz, naq gur xvat bs Oryn
(gur fnzr vf Mbne;) naq gurl wbvarq onggyr jvgu gurz va gur inyr bs
Fvqqvz; 14:9 Jvgu Purqbeynbzre gur xvat bs Rynz, naq jvgu Gvqny xvat
bs angvbaf, naq Nzencury xvat bs Fuvane, naq Nevbpu xvat bs Ryynfne;
sbhe xvatf jvgu svir.

14:10 Naq gur inyr bs Fvqqvz jnf shyy bs fyvzrcvgf; naq gur xvatf bs
Fbqbz naq Tbzbeenu syrq, naq sryy gurer; naq gurl gung erznvarq syrq
gb gur zbhagnva.

14:11 Naq gurl gbbx nyy gur tbbqf bs Fbqbz naq Tbzbeenu, naq nyy gurve
ivpghnyf, naq jrag gurve jnl.

14:12 Naq gurl gbbx Ybg, Noenz'f oebgure'f fba, jub qjryg va Fbqbz,
naq uvf tbbqf, naq qrcnegrq.

14:13 Naq gurer pnzr bar gung unq rfpncrq, naq gbyq Noenz gur Uroerj;
sbe ur qjryg va gur cynva bs Znzer gur Nzbevgr, oebgure bs Rfupby, naq
oebgure bs Nare: naq gurfr jrer pbasrqrengr jvgu Noenz.

14:14 Naq jura Noenz urneq gung uvf oebgure jnf gnxra pncgvir, ur
nezrq uvf genvarq freinagf, obea va uvf bja ubhfr, guerr uhaqerq naq
rvtugrra, naq chefhrq gurz hagb Qna.

14:15 Naq ur qvivqrq uvzfrys ntnvafg gurz, ur naq uvf freinagf, ol
avtug, naq fzbgr gurz, naq chefhrq gurz hagb Ubonu, juvpu vf ba gur
yrsg unaq bs Qnznfphf.

14:16 Naq ur oebhtug onpx nyy gur tbbqf, naq nyfb oebhtug ntnva uvf
oebgure Ybg, naq uvf tbbqf, naq gur jbzra nyfb, naq gur crbcyr.

14:17 Naq gur xvat bs Fbqbz jrag bhg gb zrrg uvz nsgre uvf erghea sebz
gur fynhtugre bs Purqbeynbzre, naq bs gur xvatf gung jrer jvgu uvz, ng
gur inyyrl bs Funiru, juvpu vf gur xvat'f qnyr.

14:18 Naq Zrypuvmrqrx xvat bs Fnyrz oebhtug sbegu oernq naq jvar: naq
ur jnf gur cevrfg bs gur zbfg uvtu Tbq.

14:19 Naq ur oyrffrq uvz, naq fnvq, Oyrffrq or Noenz bs gur zbfg uvtu
Tbq, cbffrffbe bs urnira naq rnegu: 14:20 Naq oyrffrq or gur zbfg uvtu
Tbq, juvpu ungu qryvirerq guvar rarzvrf vagb gul unaq. Naq ur tnir uvz
gvgurf bs nyy.

14:21 Naq gur xvat bs Fbqbz fnvq hagb Noenz, Tvir zr gur crefbaf, naq
gnxr gur tbbqf gb gulfrys.

14:22 Naq Noenz fnvq gb gur xvat bs Fbqbz, V unir yvsg hc zvar unaq
hagb gur YBEQ, gur zbfg uvtu Tbq, gur cbffrffbe bs urnira naq rnegu,
14:23 Gung V jvyy abg gnxr sebz n guernq rira gb n fubryngpurg, naq
gung V jvyy abg gnxr nal guvat gung vf guvar, yrfg gubh fubhyqrfg fnl,
V unir znqr Noenz evpu: 14:24 Fnir bayl gung juvpu gur lbhat zra unir
rngra, naq gur cbegvba bs gur zra juvpu jrag jvgu zr, Nare, Rfupby,
naq Znzer; yrg gurz gnxr gurve cbegvba.

15:1 Nsgre gurfr guvatf gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ pnzr hagb Noenz va n
ivfvba, fnlvat, Srne abg, Noenz: V nz gul fuvryq, naq gul rkprrqvat
terng erjneq.

15:2 Naq Noenz fnvq, YBEQ Tbq, jung jvyg gubh tvir zr, frrvat V tb
puvyqyrff, naq gur fgrjneq bs zl ubhfr vf guvf Ryvrmre bs Qnznfphf?
15:3 Naq Noenz fnvq, Orubyq, gb zr gubh unfg tvira ab frrq: naq, yb,
bar obea va zl ubhfr vf zvar urve.

15:4 Naq, orubyq, gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ pnzr hagb uvz, fnlvat, Guvf
funyy abg or guvar urve; ohg ur gung funyy pbzr sbegu bhg bs guvar bja
objryf funyy or guvar urve.

15:5 Naq ur oebhtug uvz sbegu noebnq, naq fnvq, Ybbx abj gbjneq
urnira, naq gryy gur fgnef, vs gubh or noyr gb ahzore gurz: naq ur
fnvq hagb uvz, Fb funyy gul frrq or.

15:6 Naq ur oryvrirq va gur YBEQ; naq ur pbhagrq vg gb uvz sbe
evtugrbhfarff.

15:7 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, V nz gur YBEQ gung oebhtug gurr bhg bs He
bs gur Punyqrrf, gb tvir gurr guvf ynaq gb vaurevg vg.

15:8 Naq ur fnvq, YBEQ Tbq, jurerol funyy V xabj gung V funyy vaurevg
vg?  15:9 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Gnxr zr na urvsre bs guerr lrnef byq,
naq n fur tbng bs guerr lrnef byq, naq n enz bs guerr lrnef byq, naq n
ghegyrqbir, naq n lbhat cvtrba.

15:10 Naq ur gbbx hagb uvz nyy gurfr, naq qvivqrq gurz va gur zvqfg,
naq ynvq rnpu cvrpr bar ntnvafg nabgure: ohg gur oveqf qvivqrq ur abg.

15:11 Naq jura gur sbjyf pnzr qbja hcba gur pnepnfrf, Noenz qebir gurz
njnl.

15:12 Naq jura gur fha jnf tbvat qbja, n qrrc fyrrc sryy hcba Noenz;
naq, yb, na ubeebe bs terng qnexarff sryy hcba uvz.

15:13 Naq ur fnvq hagb Noenz, Xabj bs n fhergl gung gul frrq funyy or
n fgenatre va n ynaq gung vf abg gurve'f, naq funyy freir gurz; naq
gurl funyy nssyvpg gurz sbhe uhaqerq lrnef; 15:14 Naq nyfb gung
angvba, jubz gurl funyy freir, jvyy V whqtr: naq nsgrejneq funyy gurl
pbzr bhg jvgu terng fhofgnapr.

15:15 Naq gubh funyg tb gb gul snguref va crnpr; gubh funyg or ohevrq
va n tbbq byq ntr.

15:16 Ohg va gur sbhegu trarengvba gurl funyy pbzr uvgure ntnva: sbe
gur vavdhvgl bs gur Nzbevgrf vf abg lrg shyy.

15:17 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung, jura gur fha jrag qbja, naq vg jnf
qnex, orubyq n fzbxvat sheanpr, naq n oheavat ynzc gung cnffrq orgjrra
gubfr cvrprf.

15:18 Va gur fnzr qnl gur YBEQ znqr n pbiranag jvgu Noenz, fnlvat,
Hagb gul frrq unir V tvira guvf ynaq, sebz gur evire bs Rtlcg hagb gur
terng evire, gur evire Rhcuengrf: 15:19 Gur Xravgrf, naq gur
Xravmmvgrf, naq gur Xnqzbavgrf, 15:20 Naq gur Uvggvgrf, naq gur
Crevmmvgrf, naq gur Ercunvzf, 15:21 Naq gur Nzbevgrf, naq gur
Pnannavgrf, naq gur Tvetnfuvgrf, naq gur Wrohfvgrf.

16:1 Abj Fnenv Noenz'f jvsr oner uvz ab puvyqera: naq fur unq na
unaqznvq, na Rtlcgvna, jubfr anzr jnf Untne.

16:2 Naq Fnenv fnvq hagb Noenz, Orubyq abj, gur YBEQ ungu erfgenvarq
zr sebz ornevat: V cenl gurr, tb va hagb zl znvq; vg znl or gung V znl
bognva puvyqera ol ure. Naq Noenz urnexrarq gb gur ibvpr bs Fnenv.

16:3 Naq Fnenv Noenz'f jvsr gbbx Untne ure znvq gur Rtlcgvna, nsgre
Noenz unq qjryg gra lrnef va gur ynaq bs Pnanna, naq tnir ure gb ure
uhfonaq Noenz gb or uvf jvsr.

16:4 Naq ur jrag va hagb Untne, naq fur pbaprvirq: naq jura fur fnj
gung fur unq pbaprvirq, ure zvfgerff jnf qrfcvfrq va ure rlrf.

16:5 Naq Fnenv fnvq hagb Noenz, Zl jebat or hcba gurr: V unir tvira zl
znvq vagb gul obfbz; naq jura fur fnj gung fur unq pbaprvirq, V jnf
qrfcvfrq va ure rlrf: gur YBEQ whqtr orgjrra zr naq gurr.

16:6 Ohg Noenz fnvq hagb Fnenv, Orubyq, gul znvq vf va guvar unaq; qb
gb ure nf vg cyrnfrgu gurr. Naq jura Fnenv qrnyg uneqyl jvgu ure, fur
syrq sebz ure snpr.

16:7 Naq gur natry bs gur YBEQ sbhaq ure ol n sbhagnva bs jngre va gur
jvyqrearff, ol gur sbhagnva va gur jnl gb Fuhe.

16:8 Naq ur fnvq, Untne, Fnenv'f znvq, jurapr pnzrfg gubh? naq juvgure
jvyg gubh tb? Naq fur fnvq, V syrr sebz gur snpr bs zl zvfgerff Fnenv.

16:9 Naq gur natry bs gur YBEQ fnvq hagb ure, Erghea gb gul zvfgerff,
naq fhozvg gulfrys haqre ure unaqf.

16:10 Naq gur natry bs gur YBEQ fnvq hagb ure, V jvyy zhygvcyl gul
frrq rkprrqvatyl, gung vg funyy abg or ahzorerq sbe zhygvghqr.

16:11 Naq gur natry bs gur YBEQ fnvq hagb ure, Orubyq, gubh neg jvgu
puvyq naq funyg orne n fba, naq funyg pnyy uvf anzr Vfuznry; orpnhfr
gur YBEQ ungu urneq gul nssyvpgvba.

16:12 Naq ur jvyy or n jvyq zna; uvf unaq jvyy or ntnvafg rirel zna,
naq rirel zna'f unaq ntnvafg uvz; naq ur funyy qjryy va gur cerfrapr
bs nyy uvf oerguera.

16:13 Naq fur pnyyrq gur anzr bs gur YBEQ gung fcnxr hagb ure, Gubh
Tbq frrfg zr: sbe fur fnvq, Unir V nyfb urer ybbxrq nsgre uvz gung
frrgu zr?  16:14 Jurersber gur jryy jnf pnyyrq Orreynunvebv; orubyq,
vg vf orgjrra Xnqrfu naq Orerq.

16:15 Naq Untne oner Noenz n fba: naq Noenz pnyyrq uvf fba'f anzr,
juvpu Untne oner, Vfuznry.

16:16 Naq Noenz jnf sbhefpber naq fvk lrnef byq, jura Untne oner
Vfuznry gb Noenz.

17:1 Naq jura Noenz jnf avargl lrnef byq naq avar, gur YBEQ nccrnerq
gb Noenz, naq fnvq hagb uvz, V nz gur Nyzvtugl Tbq; jnyx orsber zr,
naq or gubh cresrpg.

17:2 Naq V jvyy znxr zl pbiranag orgjrra zr naq gurr, naq jvyy
zhygvcyl gurr rkprrqvatyl.

17:3 Naq Noenz sryy ba uvf snpr: naq Tbq gnyxrq jvgu uvz, fnlvat, 17:4
Nf sbe zr, orubyq, zl pbiranag vf jvgu gurr, naq gubh funyg or n
sngure bs znal angvbaf.

17:5 Arvgure funyy gul anzr nal zber or pnyyrq Noenz, ohg gul anzr
funyy or Noenunz; sbe n sngure bs znal angvbaf unir V znqr gurr.

17:6 Naq V jvyy znxr gurr rkprrqvat sehvgshy, naq V jvyy znxr angvbaf
bs gurr, naq xvatf funyy pbzr bhg bs gurr.

17:7 Naq V jvyy rfgnoyvfu zl pbiranag orgjrra zr naq gurr naq gul frrq
nsgre gurr va gurve trarengvbaf sbe na rireynfgvat pbiranag, gb or n
Tbq hagb gurr, naq gb gul frrq nsgre gurr.

17:8 Naq V jvyy tvir hagb gurr, naq gb gul frrq nsgre gurr, gur ynaq
jurerva gubh neg n fgenatre, nyy gur ynaq bs Pnanna, sbe na
rireynfgvat cbffrffvba; naq V jvyy or gurve Tbq.

17:9 Naq Tbq fnvq hagb Noenunz, Gubh funyg xrrc zl pbiranag gurersber,
gubh, naq gul frrq nsgre gurr va gurve trarengvbaf.

17:10 Guvf vf zl pbiranag, juvpu lr funyy xrrc, orgjrra zr naq lbh naq
gul frrq nsgre gurr; Rirel zna puvyq nzbat lbh funyy or pvephzpvfrq.

17:11 Naq lr funyy pvephzpvfr gur syrfu bs lbhe sberfxva; naq vg funyy
or n gbxra bs gur pbiranag orgjvkg zr naq lbh.

17:12 Naq ur gung vf rvtug qnlf byq funyy or pvephzpvfrq nzbat lbh,
rirel zna puvyq va lbhe trarengvbaf, ur gung vf obea va gur ubhfr, be
obhtug jvgu zbarl bs nal fgenatre, juvpu vf abg bs gul frrq.

17:13 Ur gung vf obea va gul ubhfr, naq ur gung vf obhtug jvgu gul
zbarl, zhfg arrqf or pvephzpvfrq: naq zl pbiranag funyy or va lbhe
syrfu sbe na rireynfgvat pbiranag.

17:14 Naq gur hapvephzpvfrq zna puvyq jubfr syrfu bs uvf sberfxva vf
abg pvephzpvfrq, gung fbhy funyy or phg bss sebz uvf crbcyr; ur ungu
oebxra zl pbiranag.

17:15 Naq Tbq fnvq hagb Noenunz, Nf sbe Fnenv gul jvsr, gubh funyg abg
pnyy ure anzr Fnenv, ohg Fnenu funyy ure anzr or.

17:16 Naq V jvyy oyrff ure, naq tvir gurr n fba nyfb bs ure: lrn, V
jvyy oyrff ure, naq fur funyy or n zbgure bs angvbaf; xvatf bs crbcyr
funyy or bs ure.

17:17 Gura Noenunz sryy hcba uvf snpr, naq ynhturq, naq fnvq va uvf
urneg, Funyy n puvyq or obea hagb uvz gung vf na uhaqerq lrnef byq?
naq funyy Fnenu, gung vf avargl lrnef byq, orne?  17:18 Naq Noenunz
fnvq hagb Tbq, B gung Vfuznry zvtug yvir orsber gurr!  17:19 Naq Tbq
fnvq, Fnenu gul jvsr funyy orne gurr n fba vaqrrq; naq gubh funyg pnyy
uvf anzr Vfnnp: naq V jvyy rfgnoyvfu zl pbiranag jvgu uvz sbe na
rireynfgvat pbiranag, naq jvgu uvf frrq nsgre uvz.

17:20 Naq nf sbe Vfuznry, V unir urneq gurr: Orubyq, V unir oyrffrq
uvz, naq jvyy znxr uvz sehvgshy, naq jvyy zhygvcyl uvz rkprrqvatyl;
gjryir cevaprf funyy ur ortrg, naq V jvyy znxr uvz n terng angvba.

17:21 Ohg zl pbiranag jvyy V rfgnoyvfu jvgu Vfnnp, juvpu Fnenu funyy
orne hagb gurr ng guvf frg gvzr va gur arkg lrne.

17:22 Naq ur yrsg bss gnyxvat jvgu uvz, naq Tbq jrag hc sebz Noenunz.

17:23 Naq Noenunz gbbx Vfuznry uvf fba, naq nyy gung jrer obea va uvf
ubhfr, naq nyy gung jrer obhtug jvgu uvf zbarl, rirel znyr nzbat gur
zra bs Noenunz'f ubhfr; naq pvephzpvfrq gur syrfu bs gurve sberfxva va
gur frysfnzr qnl, nf Tbq unq fnvq hagb uvz.

17:24 Naq Noenunz jnf avargl lrnef byq naq avar, jura ur jnf
pvephzpvfrq va gur syrfu bs uvf sberfxva.

17:25 Naq Vfuznry uvf fba jnf guvegrra lrnef byq, jura ur jnf
pvephzpvfrq va gur syrfu bs uvf sberfxva.

17:26 Va gur frysfnzr qnl jnf Noenunz pvephzpvfrq, naq Vfuznry uvf
fba.

17:27 Naq nyy gur zra bs uvf ubhfr, obea va gur ubhfr, naq obhtug jvgu
zbarl bs gur fgenatre, jrer pvephzpvfrq jvgu uvz.

18:1 Naq gur YBEQ nccrnerq hagb uvz va gur cynvaf bs Znzer: naq ur fng
va gur grag qbbe va gur urng bs gur qnl; 18:2 Naq ur yvsg hc uvf rlrf
naq ybbxrq, naq, yb, guerr zra fgbbq ol uvz: naq jura ur fnj gurz, ur
ena gb zrrg gurz sebz gur grag qbbe, naq objrq uvzfrys gbjneq gur
tebhaq, 18:3 Naq fnvq, Zl YBEQ, vs abj V unir sbhaq snibhe va gul
fvtug, cnff abg njnl, V cenl gurr, sebz gul freinag: 18:4 Yrg n yvggyr
jngre, V cenl lbh, or srgpurq, naq jnfu lbhe srrg, naq erfg lbhefryirf
haqre gur gerr: 18:5 Naq V jvyy srgpu n zbefry bs oernq, naq pbzsbeg
lr lbhe urnegf; nsgre gung lr funyy cnff ba: sbe gurersber ner lr pbzr
gb lbhe freinag. Naq gurl fnvq, Fb qb, nf gubh unfg fnvq.

18:6 Naq Noenunz unfgrarq vagb gur grag hagb Fnenu, naq fnvq, Znxr
ernql dhvpxyl guerr zrnfherf bs svar zrny, xarnq vg, naq znxr pnxrf
hcba gur urnegu.

18:7 Naq Noenunz ena hagb gur ureq, naq srgpug n pnys graqre naq tbbq,
naq tnir vg hagb n lbhat zna; naq ur unfgrq gb qerff vg.

18:8 Naq ur gbbx ohggre, naq zvyx, naq gur pnys juvpu ur unq qerffrq,
naq frg vg orsber gurz; naq ur fgbbq ol gurz haqre gur gerr, naq gurl
qvq rng.

18:9 Naq gurl fnvq hagb uvz, Jurer vf Fnenu gul jvsr? Naq ur fnvq,
Orubyq, va gur grag.

18:10 Naq ur fnvq, V jvyy pregnvayl erghea hagb gurr nppbeqvat gb gur
gvzr bs yvsr; naq, yb, Fnenu gul jvsr funyy unir n fba. Naq Fnenu
urneq vg va gur grag qbbe, juvpu jnf oruvaq uvz.

18:11 Abj Noenunz naq Fnenu jrer byq naq jryy fgevpxra va ntr; naq vg
prnfrq gb or jvgu Fnenu nsgre gur znaare bs jbzra.

18:12 Gurersber Fnenu ynhturq jvguva urefrys, fnlvat, Nsgre V nz jnkrq
byq funyy V unir cyrnfher, zl ybeq orvat byq nyfb?  18:13 Naq gur YBEQ
fnvq hagb Noenunz, Jurersber qvq Fnenu ynhtu, fnlvat, Funyy V bs n
fhergl orne n puvyq, juvpu nz byq?  18:14 Vf nal guvat gbb uneq sbe
gur YBEQ? Ng gur gvzr nccbvagrq V jvyy erghea hagb gurr, nppbeqvat gb
gur gvzr bs yvsr, naq Fnenu funyy unir n fba.

18:15 Gura Fnenu qravrq, fnlvat, V ynhturq abg; sbe fur jnf nsenvq.
Naq ur fnvq, Anl; ohg gubh qvqfg ynhtu.

18:16 Naq gur zra ebfr hc sebz gurapr, naq ybbxrq gbjneq Fbqbz: naq
Noenunz jrag jvgu gurz gb oevat gurz ba gur jnl.

18:17 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq, Funyy V uvqr sebz Noenunz gung guvat juvpu V
qb; 18:18 Frrvat gung Noenunz funyy fheryl orpbzr n terng naq zvtugl
angvba, naq nyy gur angvbaf bs gur rnegu funyy or oyrffrq va uvz?
18:19 Sbe V xabj uvz, gung ur jvyy pbzznaq uvf puvyqera naq uvf
ubhfrubyq nsgre uvz, naq gurl funyy xrrc gur jnl bs gur YBEQ, gb qb
whfgvpr naq whqtzrag; gung gur YBEQ znl oevat hcba Noenunz gung juvpu
ur ungu fcbxra bs uvz.

18:20 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq, Orpnhfr gur pel bs Fbqbz naq Tbzbeenu vf
terng, naq orpnhfr gurve fva vf irel tevribhf; 18:21 V jvyy tb qbja
abj, naq frr jurgure gurl unir qbar nygbtrgure nppbeqvat gb gur pel bs
vg, juvpu vf pbzr hagb zr; naq vs abg, V jvyy xabj.

18:22 Naq gur zra ghearq gurve snprf sebz gurapr, naq jrag gbjneq
Fbqbz: ohg Noenunz fgbbq lrg orsber gur YBEQ.

18:23 Naq Noenunz qerj arne, naq fnvq, Jvyg gubh nyfb qrfgebl gur
evtugrbhf jvgu gur jvpxrq?  18:24 Crenqiragher gurer or svsgl
evtugrbhf jvguva gur pvgl: jvyg gubh nyfb qrfgebl naq abg fcner gur
cynpr sbe gur svsgl evtugrbhf gung ner gurerva?  18:25 Gung or sne
sebz gurr gb qb nsgre guvf znaare, gb fynl gur evtugrbhf jvgu gur
jvpxrq: naq gung gur evtugrbhf fubhyq or nf gur jvpxrq, gung or sne
sebz gurr: Funyy abg gur Whqtr bs nyy gur rnegu qb evtug?  18:26 Naq
gur YBEQ fnvq, Vs V svaq va Fbqbz svsgl evtugrbhf jvguva gur pvgl,
gura V jvyy fcner nyy gur cynpr sbe gurve fnxrf.

18:27 Naq Noenunz nafjrerq naq fnvq, Orubyq abj, V unir gnxra hcba zr
gb fcrnx hagb gur YBEQ, juvpu nz ohg qhfg naq nfurf: 18:28
Crenqiragher gurer funyy ynpx svir bs gur svsgl evtugrbhf: jvyg gubh
qrfgebl nyy gur pvgl sbe ynpx bs svir? Naq ur fnvq, Vs V svaq gurer
sbegl naq svir, V jvyy abg qrfgebl vg.

18:29 Naq ur fcnxr hagb uvz lrg ntnva, naq fnvq, Crenqiragher gurer
funyy or sbegl sbhaq gurer. Naq ur fnvq, V jvyy abg qb vg sbe sbegl'f
fnxr.

18:30 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Bu yrg abg gur YBEQ or natel, naq V jvyy
fcrnx: Crenqiragher gurer funyy guvegl or sbhaq gurer. Naq ur fnvq, V
jvyy abg qb vg, vs V svaq guvegl gurer.

18:31 Naq ur fnvq, Orubyq abj, V unir gnxra hcba zr gb fcrnx hagb gur
YBEQ: Crenqiragher gurer funyy or gjragl sbhaq gurer. Naq ur fnvq, V
jvyy abg qrfgebl vg sbe gjragl'f fnxr.

18:32 Naq ur fnvq, Bu yrg abg gur YBEQ or natel, naq V jvyy fcrnx lrg
ohg guvf bapr: Crenqiragher gra funyy or sbhaq gurer. Naq ur fnvq, V
jvyy abg qrfgebl vg sbe gra'f fnxr.

18:33 Naq gur YBEQ jrag uvf jnl, nf fbba nf ur unq yrsg pbzzhavat jvgu
Noenunz: naq Noenunz erghearq hagb uvf cynpr.

19:1 Naq gurer pnzr gjb natryf gb Fbqbz ng rira; naq Ybg fng va gur
tngr bs Fbqbz: naq Ybg frrvat gurz ebfr hc gb zrrg gurz; naq ur objrq
uvzfrys jvgu uvf snpr gbjneq gur tebhaq; 19:2 Naq ur fnvq, Orubyq abj,
zl ybeqf, ghea va, V cenl lbh, vagb lbhe freinag'f ubhfr, naq gneel
nyy avtug, naq jnfu lbhe srrg, naq lr funyy evfr hc rneyl, naq tb ba
lbhe jnlf. Naq gurl fnvq, Anl; ohg jr jvyy novqr va gur fgerrg nyy
avtug.

19:3 Naq ur cerffrq hcba gurz terngyl; naq gurl ghearq va hagb uvz,
naq ragrerq vagb uvf ubhfr; naq ur znqr gurz n srnfg, naq qvq onxr
hayrnirarq oernq, naq gurl qvq rng.

19:4 Ohg orsber gurl ynl qbja, gur zra bs gur pvgl, rira gur zra bs
Fbqbz, pbzcnffrq gur ubhfr ebhaq, obgu byq naq lbhat, nyy gur crbcyr
sebz rirel dhnegre: 19:5 Naq gurl pnyyrq hagb Ybg, naq fnvq hagb uvz,
Jurer ner gur zra juvpu pnzr va gb gurr guvf avtug? oevat gurz bhg
hagb hf, gung jr znl xabj gurz.

19:6 Naq Ybg jrag bhg ng gur qbbe hagb gurz, naq fuhg gur qbbe nsgre
uvz, 19:7 Naq fnvq, V cenl lbh, oerguera, qb abg fb jvpxrqyl.

19:8 Orubyq abj, V unir gjb qnhtugref juvpu unir abg xabja zna; yrg
zr, V cenl lbh, oevat gurz bhg hagb lbh, naq qb lr gb gurz nf vf tbbq
va lbhe rlrf: bayl hagb gurfr zra qb abguvat; sbe gurersber pnzr gurl
haqre gur funqbj bs zl ebbs.

19:9 Naq gurl fnvq, Fgnaq onpx. Naq gurl fnvq ntnva, Guvf bar sryybj
pnzr va gb fbwbhea, naq ur jvyy arrqf or n whqtr: abj jvyy jr qrny
jbefr jvgu gurr, guna jvgu gurz. Naq gurl cerffrq fber hcba gur zna,
rira Ybg, naq pnzr arne gb oernx gur qbbe.

19:10 Ohg gur zra chg sbegu gurve unaq, naq chyyrq Ybg vagb gur ubhfr
gb gurz, naq fuhg gb gur qbbe.

19:11 Naq gurl fzbgr gur zra gung jrer ng gur qbbe bs gur ubhfr jvgu
oyvaqarff, obgu fznyy naq terng: fb gung gurl jrnevrq gurzfryirf gb
svaq gur qbbe.

19:12 Naq gur zra fnvq hagb Ybg, Unfg gubh urer nal orfvqrf? fba va
ynj, naq gul fbaf, naq gul qnhtugref, naq jungfbrire gubh unfg va gur
pvgl, oevat gurz bhg bs guvf cynpr: 19:13 Sbe jr jvyy qrfgebl guvf
cynpr, orpnhfr gur pel bs gurz vf jnkra terng orsber gur snpr bs gur
YBEQ; naq gur YBEQ ungu frag hf gb qrfgebl vg.

19:14 Naq Ybg jrag bhg, naq fcnxr hagb uvf fbaf va ynj, juvpu zneevrq
uvf qnhtugref, naq fnvq, Hc, trg lbh bhg bs guvf cynpr; sbe gur YBEQ
jvyy qrfgebl guvf pvgl. Ohg ur frrzrq nf bar gung zbpxrq hagb uvf fbaf
va ynj.

19:15 Naq jura gur zbeavat nebfr, gura gur natryf unfgrarq Ybg,
fnlvat, Nevfr, gnxr gul jvsr, naq gul gjb qnhtugref, juvpu ner urer;
yrfg gubh or pbafhzrq va gur vavdhvgl bs gur pvgl.

19:16 Naq juvyr ur yvatrerq, gur zra ynvq ubyq hcba uvf unaq, naq hcba
gur unaq bs uvf jvsr, naq hcba gur unaq bs uvf gjb qnhtugref; gur YBEQ
orvat zrepvshy hagb uvz: naq gurl oebhtug uvz sbegu, naq frg uvz
jvgubhg gur pvgl.

19:17 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gurl unq oebhtug gurz sbegu noebnq,
gung ur fnvq, Rfpncr sbe gul yvsr; ybbx abg oruvaq gurr, arvgure fgnl
gubh va nyy gur cynva; rfpncr gb gur zbhagnva, yrfg gubh or pbafhzrq.

19:18 Naq Ybg fnvq hagb gurz, Bu, abg fb, zl YBEQ: 19:19 Orubyq abj,
gul freinag ungu sbhaq tenpr va gul fvtug, naq gubh unfg zntavsvrq gul
zrepl, juvpu gubh unfg furjrq hagb zr va fnivat zl yvsr; naq V pnaabg
rfpncr gb gur zbhagnva, yrfg fbzr rivy gnxr zr, naq V qvr: 19:20
Orubyq abj, guvf pvgl vf arne gb syrr hagb, naq vg vf n yvggyr bar:
Bu, yrg zr rfpncr guvgure, (vf vg abg n yvggyr bar?) naq zl fbhy funyy
yvir.

19:21 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Frr, V unir npprcgrq gurr pbapreavat guvf
guvat nyfb, gung V jvyy abg bireguebj guvf pvgl, sbe gur juvpu gubh
unfg fcbxra.

19:22 Unfgr gurr, rfpncr guvgure; sbe V pnaabg qb nalguvat gvyy gubh
or pbzr guvgure. Gurersber gur anzr bs gur pvgl jnf pnyyrq Mbne.

19:23 Gur fha jnf evfra hcba gur rnegu jura Ybg ragrerq vagb Mbne.

19:24 Gura gur YBEQ envarq hcba Fbqbz naq hcba Tbzbeenu oevzfgbar naq
sver sebz gur YBEQ bhg bs urnira; 19:25 Naq ur bireguerj gubfr pvgvrf,
naq nyy gur cynva, naq nyy gur vaunovgnagf bs gur pvgvrf, naq gung
juvpu terj hcba gur tebhaq.

19:26 Ohg uvf jvsr ybbxrq onpx sebz oruvaq uvz, naq fur orpnzr n
cvyyne bs fnyg.

19:27 Naq Noenunz tng hc rneyl va gur zbeavat gb gur cynpr jurer ur
fgbbq orsber gur YBEQ: 19:28 Naq ur ybbxrq gbjneq Fbqbz naq Tbzbeenu,
naq gbjneq nyy gur ynaq bs gur cynva, naq oruryq, naq, yb, gur fzbxr
bs gur pbhagel jrag hc nf gur fzbxr bs n sheanpr.

19:29 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Tbq qrfgeblrq gur pvgvrf bs gur cynva,
gung Tbq erzrzorerq Noenunz, naq frag Ybg bhg bs gur zvqfg bs gur
bireguebj, jura ur bireguerj gur pvgvrf va gur juvpu Ybg qjryg.

19:30 Naq Ybg jrag hc bhg bs Mbne, naq qjryg va gur zbhagnva, naq uvf
gjb qnhtugref jvgu uvz; sbe ur srnerq gb qjryy va Mbne: naq ur qjryg
va n pnir, ur naq uvf gjb qnhtugref.

19:31 Naq gur svefgobea fnvq hagb gur lbhatre, Bhe sngure vf byq, naq
gurer vf abg n zna va gur rnegu gb pbzr va hagb hf nsgre gur znaare bs
nyy gur rnegu: 19:32 Pbzr, yrg hf znxr bhe sngure qevax jvar, naq jr
jvyy yvr jvgu uvz, gung jr znl cerfreir frrq bs bhe sngure.

19:33 Naq gurl znqr gurve sngure qevax jvar gung avtug: naq gur
svefgobea jrag va, naq ynl jvgu ure sngure; naq ur creprvirq abg jura
fur ynl qbja, abe jura fur nebfr.

19:34 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ba gur zbeebj, gung gur svefgobea fnvq hagb
gur lbhatre, Orubyq, V ynl lrfgreavtug jvgu zl sngure: yrg hf znxr uvz
qevax jvar guvf avtug nyfb; naq tb gubh va, naq yvr jvgu uvz, gung jr
znl cerfreir frrq bs bhe sngure.

19:35 Naq gurl znqr gurve sngure qevax jvar gung avtug nyfb: naq gur
lbhatre nebfr, naq ynl jvgu uvz; naq ur creprvirq abg jura fur ynl
qbja, abe jura fur nebfr.

19:36 Guhf jrer obgu gur qnhtugref bs Ybg jvgu puvyq ol gurve sngure.

19:37 Naq gur svefg obea oner n fba, naq pnyyrq uvf anzr Zbno: gur
fnzr vf gur sngure bs gur Zbnovgrf hagb guvf qnl.

19:38 Naq gur lbhatre, fur nyfb oner n fba, naq pnyyrq uvf anzr
Oranzzv: gur fnzr vf gur sngure bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba hagb guvf
qnl.

20:1 Naq Noenunz wbhearlrq sebz gurapr gbjneq gur fbhgu pbhagel, naq
qjryyrq orgjrra Xnqrfu naq Fuhe, naq fbwbhearq va Trene.

20:2 Naq Noenunz fnvq bs Fnenu uvf jvsr, Fur vf zl fvfgre: naq
Novzryrpu xvat bs Trene frag, naq gbbx Fnenu.

20:3 Ohg Tbq pnzr gb Novzryrpu va n qernz ol avtug, naq fnvq gb uvz,
Orubyq, gubh neg ohg n qrnq zna, sbe gur jbzna juvpu gubh unfg gnxra;
sbe fur vf n zna'f jvsr.

20:4 Ohg Novzryrpu unq abg pbzr arne ure: naq ur fnvq, YBEQ, jvyg gubh
fynl nyfb n evtugrbhf angvba?  20:5 Fnvq ur abg hagb zr, Fur vf zl
fvfgre? naq fur, rira fur urefrys fnvq, Ur vf zl oebgure: va gur
vagrtevgl bs zl urneg naq vaabprapl bs zl unaqf unir V qbar guvf.

20:6 Naq Tbq fnvq hagb uvz va n qernz, Lrn, V xabj gung gubh qvqfg
guvf va gur vagrtevgl bs gul urneg; sbe V nyfb jvguuryq gurr sebz
fvaavat ntnvafg zr: gurersber fhssrerq V gurr abg gb gbhpu ure.

20:7 Abj gurersber erfgber gur zna uvf jvsr; sbe ur vf n cebcurg, naq
ur funyy cenl sbe gurr, naq gubh funyg yvir: naq vs gubh erfgber ure
abg, xabj gubh gung gubh funyg fheryl qvr, gubh, naq nyy gung ner
guvar.

20:8 Gurersber Novzryrpu ebfr rneyl va gur zbeavat, naq pnyyrq nyy uvf
freinagf, naq gbyq nyy gurfr guvatf va gurve rnef: naq gur zra jrer
fber nsenvq.

20:9 Gura Novzryrpu pnyyrq Noenunz, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Jung unfg gubh
qbar hagb hf? naq jung unir V bssraqrq gurr, gung gubh unfg oebhtug ba
zr naq ba zl xvatqbz n terng fva? gubh unfg qbar qrrqf hagb zr gung
bhtug abg gb or qbar.

20:10 Naq Novzryrpu fnvq hagb Noenunz, Jung fnjrfg gubh, gung gubh
unfg qbar guvf guvat?  20:11 Naq Noenunz fnvq, Orpnhfr V gubhtug,
Fheryl gur srne bs Tbq vf abg va guvf cynpr; naq gurl jvyy fynl zr sbe
zl jvsr'f fnxr.

20:12 Naq lrg vaqrrq fur vf zl fvfgre; fur vf gur qnhtugre bs zl
sngure, ohg abg gur qnhtugre bs zl zbgure; naq fur orpnzr zl jvsr.

20:13 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Tbq pnhfrq zr gb jnaqre sebz zl
sngure'f ubhfr, gung V fnvq hagb ure, Guvf vf gul xvaqarff juvpu gubh
funyg furj hagb zr; ng rirel cynpr juvgure jr funyy pbzr, fnl bs zr,
Ur vf zl oebgure.

20:14 Naq Novzryrpu gbbx furrc, naq bkra, naq zrafreinagf, naq
jbzrafreinagf, naq tnir gurz hagb Noenunz, naq erfgberq uvz Fnenu uvf
jvsr.

20:15 Naq Novzryrpu fnvq, Orubyq, zl ynaq vf orsber gurr: qjryy jurer
vg cyrnfrgu gurr.

20:16 Naq hagb Fnenu ur fnvq, Orubyq, V unir tvira gul oebgure n
gubhfnaq cvrprf bs fvyire: orubyq, ur vf gb gurr n pbirevat bs gur
rlrf, hagb nyy gung ner jvgu gurr, naq jvgu nyy bgure: guhf fur jnf
ercebirq.

20:17 Fb Noenunz cenlrq hagb Tbq: naq Tbq urnyrq Novzryrpu, naq uvf
jvsr, naq uvf znvqfreinagf; naq gurl oner puvyqera.

20:18 Sbe gur YBEQ unq snfg pybfrq hc nyy gur jbzof bs gur ubhfr bs
Novzryrpu, orpnhfr bs Fnenu Noenunz'f jvsr.

21:1 Naq gur YBEQ ivfvgrq Fnenu nf ur unq fnvq, naq gur YBEQ qvq hagb
Fnenu nf ur unq fcbxra.

21:2 Sbe Fnenu pbaprvirq, naq oner Noenunz n fba va uvf byq ntr, ng
gur frg gvzr bs juvpu Tbq unq fcbxra gb uvz.

21:3 Naq Noenunz pnyyrq gur anzr bs uvf fba gung jnf obea hagb uvz,
jubz Fnenu oner gb uvz, Vfnnp.

21:4 Naq Noenunz pvephzpvfrq uvf fba Vfnnp orvat rvtug qnlf byq, nf
Tbq unq pbzznaqrq uvz.

21:5 Naq Noenunz jnf na uhaqerq lrnef byq, jura uvf fba Vfnnp jnf obea
hagb uvz.

21:6 Naq Fnenu fnvq, Tbq ungu znqr zr gb ynhtu, fb gung nyy gung urne
jvyy ynhtu jvgu zr.

21:7 Naq fur fnvq, Jub jbhyq unir fnvq hagb Noenunz, gung Fnenu fubhyq
unir tvira puvyqera fhpx? sbe V unir obea uvz n fba va uvf byq ntr.

21:8 Naq gur puvyq terj, naq jnf jrnarq: naq Noenunz znqr n terng
srnfg gur fnzr qnl gung Vfnnp jnf jrnarq.

21:9 Naq Fnenu fnj gur fba bs Untne gur Rtlcgvna, juvpu fur unq obea
hagb Noenunz, zbpxvat.

21:10 Jurersber fur fnvq hagb Noenunz, Pnfg bhg guvf obaqjbzna naq ure
fba: sbe gur fba bs guvf obaqjbzna funyy abg or urve jvgu zl fba, rira
jvgu Vfnnp.

21:11 Naq gur guvat jnf irel tevribhf va Noenunz'f fvtug orpnhfr bs
uvf fba.

21:12 Naq Tbq fnvq hagb Noenunz, Yrg vg abg or tevribhf va gul fvtug
orpnhfr bs gur ynq, naq orpnhfr bs gul obaqjbzna; va nyy gung Fnenu
ungu fnvq hagb gurr, urnexra hagb ure ibvpr; sbe va Vfnnp funyy gul
frrq or pnyyrq.

21:13 Naq nyfb bs gur fba bs gur obaqjbzna jvyy V znxr n angvba,
orpnhfr ur vf gul frrq.

21:14 Naq Noenunz ebfr hc rneyl va gur zbeavat, naq gbbx oernq, naq n
obggyr bs jngre, naq tnir vg hagb Untne, chggvat vg ba ure fubhyqre,
naq gur puvyq, naq frag ure njnl: naq fur qrcnegrq, naq jnaqrerq va
gur jvyqrearff bs Orrefuron.

21:15 Naq gur jngre jnf fcrag va gur obggyr, naq fur pnfg gur puvyq
haqre bar bs gur fuehof.

21:16 Naq fur jrag, naq fng ure qbja bire ntnvafg uvz n tbbq jnl bss,
nf vg jrer n obj fubg: sbe fur fnvq, Yrg zr abg frr gur qrngu bs gur
puvyq. Naq fur fng bire ntnvafg uvz, naq yvsg hc ure ibvpr, naq jrcg.

21:17 Naq Tbq urneq gur ibvpr bs gur ynq; naq gur natry bs Tbq pnyyrq
gb Untne bhg bs urnira, naq fnvq hagb ure, Jung nvyrgu gurr, Untne?
srne abg; sbe Tbq ungu urneq gur ibvpr bs gur ynq jurer ur vf.

21:18 Nevfr, yvsg hc gur ynq, naq ubyq uvz va guvar unaq; sbe V jvyy
znxr uvz n terng angvba.

21:19 Naq Tbq bcrarq ure rlrf, naq fur fnj n jryy bs jngre; naq fur
jrag, naq svyyrq gur obggyr jvgu jngre, naq tnir gur ynq qevax.

21:20 Naq Tbq jnf jvgu gur ynq; naq ur terj, naq qjryg va gur
jvyqrearff, naq orpnzr na nepure.

21:21 Naq ur qjryg va gur jvyqrearff bs Cnena: naq uvf zbgure gbbx uvz
n jvsr bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

21:22 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng gung gvzr, gung Novzryrpu naq Cuvpuby gur
puvrs pncgnva bs uvf ubfg fcnxr hagb Noenunz, fnlvat, Tbq vf jvgu gurr
va nyy gung gubh qbrfg: 21:23 Abj gurersber fjrne hagb zr urer ol Tbq
gung gubh jvyg abg qrny snyfryl jvgu zr, abe jvgu zl fba, abe jvgu zl
fba'f fba: ohg nppbeqvat gb gur xvaqarff gung V unir qbar hagb gurr,
gubh funyg qb hagb zr, naq gb gur ynaq jurerva gubh unfg fbwbhearq.

21:24 Naq Noenunz fnvq, V jvyy fjrne.

21:25 Naq Noenunz ercebirq Novzryrpu orpnhfr bs n jryy bs jngre, juvpu
Novzryrpu'f freinagf unq ivbyragyl gnxra njnl.

21:26 Naq Novzryrpu fnvq, V jbg abg jub ungu qbar guvf guvat; arvgure
qvqfg gubh gryy zr, arvgure lrg urneq V bs vg, ohg gb qnl.

21:27 Naq Noenunz gbbx furrc naq bkra, naq tnir gurz hagb Novzryrpu;
naq obgu bs gurz znqr n pbiranag.

21:28 Naq Noenunz frg frira rjr ynzof bs gur sybpx ol gurzfryirf.

21:29 Naq Novzryrpu fnvq hagb Noenunz, Jung zrna gurfr frira rjr ynzof
juvpu gubh unfg frg ol gurzfryirf?  21:30 Naq ur fnvq, Sbe gurfr frira
rjr ynzof funyg gubh gnxr bs zl unaq, gung gurl znl or n jvgarff hagb
zr, gung V unir qvttrq guvf jryy.

21:31 Jurersber ur pnyyrq gung cynpr Orrefuron; orpnhfr gurer gurl
fjner obgu bs gurz.

21:32 Guhf gurl znqr n pbiranag ng Orrefuron: gura Novzryrpu ebfr hc,
naq Cuvpuby gur puvrs pncgnva bs uvf ubfg, naq gurl erghearq vagb gur
ynaq bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf.

21:33 Naq Noenunz cynagrq n tebir va Orrefuron, naq pnyyrq gurer ba
gur anzr bs gur YBEQ, gur rireynfgvat Tbq.

21:34 Naq Noenunz fbwbhearq va gur Cuvyvfgvarf' ynaq znal qnlf.

22:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre gurfr guvatf, gung Tbq qvq grzcg
Noenunz, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Noenunz: naq ur fnvq, Orubyq, urer V nz.

22:2 Naq ur fnvq, Gnxr abj gul fba, guvar bayl fba Vfnnp, jubz gubh
ybirfg, naq trg gurr vagb gur ynaq bs Zbevnu; naq bssre uvz gurer sbe
n oheag bssrevat hcba bar bs gur zbhagnvaf juvpu V jvyy gryy gurr bs.

22:3 Naq Noenunz ebfr hc rneyl va gur zbeavat, naq fnqqyrq uvf nff,
naq gbbx gjb bs uvf lbhat zra jvgu uvz, naq Vfnnp uvf fba, naq pynir
gur jbbq sbe gur oheag bssrevat, naq ebfr hc, naq jrag hagb gur cynpr
bs juvpu Tbq unq gbyq uvz.

22:4 Gura ba gur guveq qnl Noenunz yvsgrq hc uvf rlrf, naq fnj gur
cynpr nsne bss.

22:5 Naq Noenunz fnvq hagb uvf lbhat zra, Novqr lr urer jvgu gur nff;
naq V naq gur ynq jvyy tb lbaqre naq jbefuvc, naq pbzr ntnva gb lbh.

22:6 Naq Noenunz gbbx gur jbbq bs gur oheag bssrevat, naq ynvq vg hcba
Vfnnp uvf fba; naq ur gbbx gur sver va uvf unaq, naq n xavsr; naq gurl
jrag obgu bs gurz gbtrgure.

22:7 Naq Vfnnp fcnxr hagb Noenunz uvf sngure, naq fnvq, Zl sngure: naq
ur fnvq, Urer nz V, zl fba. Naq ur fnvq, Orubyq gur sver naq gur jbbq:
ohg jurer vf gur ynzo sbe n oheag bssrevat?  22:8 Naq Noenunz fnvq, Zl
fba, Tbq jvyy cebivqr uvzfrys n ynzo sbe n oheag bssrevat: fb gurl
jrag obgu bs gurz gbtrgure.

22:9 Naq gurl pnzr gb gur cynpr juvpu Tbq unq gbyq uvz bs; naq Noenunz
ohvyg na nygne gurer, naq ynvq gur jbbq va beqre, naq obhaq Vfnnp uvf
fba, naq ynvq uvz ba gur nygne hcba gur jbbq.

22:10 Naq Noenunz fgergpurq sbegu uvf unaq, naq gbbx gur xavsr gb fynl
uvf fba.

22:11 Naq gur natry bs gur YBEQ pnyyrq hagb uvz bhg bs urnira, naq
fnvq, Noenunz, Noenunz: naq ur fnvq, Urer nz V.

22:12 Naq ur fnvq, Ynl abg guvar unaq hcba gur ynq, arvgure qb gubh
nal guvat hagb uvz: sbe abj V xabj gung gubh srnerfg Tbq, frrvat gubh
unfg abg jvguuryq gul fba, guvar bayl fba sebz zr.

22:13 Naq Noenunz yvsgrq hc uvf rlrf, naq ybbxrq, naq orubyq oruvaq
uvz n enz pnhtug va n guvpxrg ol uvf ubeaf: naq Noenunz jrag naq gbbx
gur enz, naq bssrerq uvz hc sbe n oheag bssrevat va gur fgrnq bs uvf
fba.

22:14 Naq Noenunz pnyyrq gur anzr bs gung cynpr Wrubinuwveru: nf vg vf
fnvq gb guvf qnl, Va gur zbhag bs gur YBEQ vg funyy or frra.

22:15 Naq gur natry bs gur YBEQ pnyyrq hagb Noenunz bhg bs urnira gur
frpbaq gvzr, 22:16 Naq fnvq, Ol zlfrys unir V fjbea, fnvgu gur YBEQ,
sbe orpnhfr gubh unfg qbar guvf guvat, naq unfg abg jvguuryq gul fba,
guvar bayl fba: 22:17 Gung va oyrffvat V jvyy oyrff gurr, naq va
zhygvcylvat V jvyy zhygvcyl gul frrq nf gur fgnef bs gur urnira, naq
nf gur fnaq juvpu vf hcba gur frn fuber; naq gul frrq funyy cbffrff
gur tngr bs uvf rarzvrf; 22:18 Naq va gul frrq funyy nyy gur angvbaf
bs gur rnegu or oyrffrq; orpnhfr gubh unfg borlrq zl ibvpr.

22:19 Fb Noenunz erghearq hagb uvf lbhat zra, naq gurl ebfr hc naq
jrag gbtrgure gb Orrefuron; naq Noenunz qjryg ng Orrefuron.

22:20 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre gurfr guvatf, gung vg jnf gbyq
Noenunz, fnlvat, Orubyq, Zvypnu, fur ungu nyfb obea puvyqera hagb gul
oebgure Anube; 22:21 Uhm uvf svefgobea, naq Ohm uvf oebgure, naq
Xrzhry gur sngure bs Nenz, 22:22 Naq Purfrq, naq Unmb, naq Cvyqnfu,
naq Wvqyncu, naq Orguhry.

22:23 Naq Orguhry ortng Erorxnu: gurfr rvtug Zvypnu qvq orne gb Anube,
Noenunz'f oebgure.

22:24 Naq uvf pbaphovar, jubfr anzr jnf Erhznu, fur oner nyfb Gronu,
naq Tnunz, naq Gununfu, naq Znnpunu.

23:1 Naq Fnenu jnf na uhaqerq naq frira naq gjragl lrnef byq: gurfr
jrer gur lrnef bs gur yvsr bs Fnenu.

23:2 Naq Fnenu qvrq va Xvewnguneon; gur fnzr vf Uroeba va gur ynaq bs
Pnanna: naq Noenunz pnzr gb zbhea sbe Fnenu, naq gb jrrc sbe ure.

23:3 Naq Noenunz fgbbq hc sebz orsber uvf qrnq, naq fcnxr hagb gur
fbaf bs Urgu, fnlvat, 23:4 V nz n fgenatre naq n fbwbheare jvgu lbh:
tvir zr n cbffrffvba bs n ohelvatcynpr jvgu lbh, gung V znl ohel zl
qrnq bhg bs zl fvtug.

23:5 Naq gur puvyqera bs Urgu nafjrerq Noenunz, fnlvat hagb uvz, 23:6
Urne hf, zl ybeq: gubh neg n zvtugl cevapr nzbat hf: va gur pubvpr bs
bhe frchypuerf ohel gul qrnq; abar bs hf funyy jvguubyq sebz gurr uvf
frchypuer, ohg gung gubh znlrfg ohel gul qrnq.

23:7 Naq Noenunz fgbbq hc, naq objrq uvzfrys gb gur crbcyr bs gur
ynaq, rira gb gur puvyqera bs Urgu.

23:8 Naq ur pbzzharq jvgu gurz, fnlvat, Vs vg or lbhe zvaq gung V
fubhyq ohel zl qrnq bhg bs zl fvtug; urne zr, naq vagerng sbe zr gb
Rcueba gur fba bs Mbune, 23:9 Gung ur znl tvir zr gur pnir bs
Znpucrynu, juvpu ur ungu, juvpu vf va gur raq bs uvf svryq; sbe nf
zhpu zbarl nf vg vf jbegu ur funyy tvir vg zr sbe n cbffrffvba bs n
ohelvatcynpr nzbatfg lbh.

23:10 Naq Rcueba qjryg nzbat gur puvyqera bs Urgu: naq Rcueba gur
Uvggvgr nafjrerq Noenunz va gur nhqvrapr bs gur puvyqera bs Urgu, rira
bs nyy gung jrag va ng gur tngr bs uvf pvgl, fnlvat, 23:11 Anl, zl
ybeq, urne zr: gur svryq tvir V gurr, naq gur pnir gung vf gurerva, V
tvir vg gurr; va gur cerfrapr bs gur fbaf bs zl crbcyr tvir V vg gurr:
ohel gul qrnq.

23:12 Naq Noenunz objrq qbja uvzfrys orsber gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq.

23:13 Naq ur fcnxr hagb Rcueba va gur nhqvrapr bs gur crbcyr bs gur
ynaq, fnlvat, Ohg vs gubh jvyg tvir vg, V cenl gurr, urne zr: V jvyy
tvir gurr zbarl sbe gur svryq; gnxr vg bs zr, naq V jvyy ohel zl qrnq
gurer.

23:14 Naq Rcueba nafjrerq Noenunz, fnlvat hagb uvz, 23:15 Zl ybeq,
urnexra hagb zr: gur ynaq vf jbegu sbhe uhaqerq furxryf bs fvyire;
jung vf gung orgjvkg zr naq gurr? ohel gurersber gul qrnq.

23:16 Naq Noenunz urnexrarq hagb Rcueba; naq Noenunz jrvturq gb Rcueba
gur fvyire, juvpu ur unq anzrq va gur nhqvrapr bs gur fbaf bs Urgu,
sbhe uhaqerq furxryf bs fvyire, pheerag zbarl jvgu gur zrepunag.

23:17 Naq gur svryq bs Rcueba juvpu jnf va Znpucrynu, juvpu jnf orsber
Znzer, gur svryq, naq gur pnir juvpu jnf gurerva, naq nyy gur gerrf
gung jrer va gur svryq, gung jrer va nyy gur obeqref ebhaq nobhg, jrer
znqr fher 23:18 Hagb Noenunz sbe n cbffrffvba va gur cerfrapr bs gur
puvyqera bs Urgu, orsber nyy gung jrag va ng gur tngr bs uvf pvgl.

23:19 Naq nsgre guvf, Noenunz ohevrq Fnenu uvf jvsr va gur pnir bs gur
svryq bs Znpucrynu orsber Znzer: gur fnzr vf Uroeba va gur ynaq bs
Pnanna.

23:20 Naq gur svryq, naq gur pnir gung vf gurerva, jrer znqr fher hagb
Noenunz sbe n cbffrffvba bs n ohelvatcynpr ol gur fbaf bs Urgu.

24:1 Naq Noenunz jnf byq, naq jryy fgevpxra va ntr: naq gur YBEQ unq
oyrffrq Noenunz va nyy guvatf.

24:2 Naq Noenunz fnvq hagb uvf ryqrfg freinag bs uvf ubhfr, gung ehyrq
bire nyy gung ur unq, Chg, V cenl gurr, gul unaq haqre zl guvtu: 24:3
Naq V jvyy znxr gurr fjrne ol gur YBEQ, gur Tbq bs urnira, naq gur Tbq
bs gur rnegu, gung gubh funyg abg gnxr n jvsr hagb zl fba bs gur
qnhtugref bs gur Pnannavgrf, nzbat jubz V qjryy: 24:4 Ohg gubh funyg
tb hagb zl pbhagel, naq gb zl xvaqerq, naq gnxr n jvsr hagb zl fba
Vfnnp.

24:5 Naq gur freinag fnvq hagb uvz, Crenqiragher gur jbzna jvyy abg or
jvyyvat gb sbyybj zr hagb guvf ynaq: zhfg V arrqf oevat gul fba ntnva
hagb gur ynaq sebz jurapr gubh pnzrfg?  24:6 Naq Noenunz fnvq hagb
uvz, Orjner gubh gung gubh oevat abg zl fba guvgure ntnva.

24:7 Gur YBEQ Tbq bs urnira, juvpu gbbx zr sebz zl sngure'f ubhfr, naq
sebz gur ynaq bs zl xvaqerq, naq juvpu fcnxr hagb zr, naq gung fjner
hagb zr, fnlvat, Hagb gul frrq jvyy V tvir guvf ynaq; ur funyy fraq
uvf natry orsber gurr, naq gubh funyg gnxr n jvsr hagb zl fba sebz
gurapr.

24:8 Naq vs gur jbzna jvyy abg or jvyyvat gb sbyybj gurr, gura gubh
funyg or pyrne sebz guvf zl bngu: bayl oevat abg zl fba guvgure ntnva.

24:9 Naq gur freinag chg uvf unaq haqre gur guvtu bs Noenunz uvf
znfgre, naq fjner gb uvz pbapreavat gung znggre.

24:10 Naq gur freinag gbbx gra pnzryf bs gur pnzryf bs uvf znfgre, naq
qrcnegrq; sbe nyy gur tbbqf bs uvf znfgre jrer va uvf unaq: naq ur
nebfr, naq jrag gb Zrfbcbgnzvn, hagb gur pvgl bs Anube.

24:11 Naq ur znqr uvf pnzryf gb xarry qbja jvgubhg gur pvgl ol n jryy
bs jngre ng gur gvzr bs gur riravat, rira gur gvzr gung jbzra tb bhg
gb qenj jngre.

24:12 Naq ur fnvq B YBEQ Tbq bs zl znfgre Noenunz, V cenl gurr, fraq
zr tbbq fcrrq guvf qnl, naq furj xvaqarff hagb zl znfgre Noenunz.

24:13 Orubyq, V fgnaq urer ol gur jryy bs jngre; naq gur qnhtugref bs
gur zra bs gur pvgl pbzr bhg gb qenj jngre: 24:14 Naq yrg vg pbzr gb
cnff, gung gur qnzfry gb jubz V funyy fnl, Yrg qbja gul cvgpure, V
cenl gurr, gung V znl qevax; naq fur funyy fnl, Qevax, naq V jvyy tvir
gul pnzryf qevax nyfb: yrg gur fnzr or fur gung gubh unfg nccbvagrq
sbe gul freinag Vfnnp; naq gurerol funyy V xabj gung gubh unfg furjrq
xvaqarff hagb zl znfgre.

24:15 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, orsber ur unq qbar fcrnxvat, gung, orubyq,
Erorxnu pnzr bhg, jub jnf obea gb Orguhry, fba bs Zvypnu, gur jvsr bs
Anube, Noenunz'f oebgure, jvgu ure cvgpure hcba ure fubhyqre.

24:16 Naq gur qnzfry jnf irel snve gb ybbx hcba, n ivetva, arvgure unq
nal zna xabja ure: naq fur jrag qbja gb gur jryy, naq svyyrq ure
cvgpure, naq pnzr hc.

24:17 Naq gur freinag ena gb zrrg ure, naq fnvq, Yrg zr, V cenl gurr,
qevax n yvggyr jngre bs gul cvgpure.

24:18 Naq fur fnvq, Qevax, zl ybeq: naq fur unfgrq, naq yrg qbja ure
cvgpure hcba ure unaq, naq tnir uvz qevax.

24:19 Naq jura fur unq qbar tvivat uvz qevax, fur fnvq, V jvyy qenj
jngre sbe gul pnzryf nyfb, hagvy gurl unir qbar qevaxvat.

24:20 Naq fur unfgrq, naq rzcgvrq ure cvgpure vagb gur gebhtu, naq ena
ntnva hagb gur jryy gb qenj jngre, naq qerj sbe nyy uvf pnzryf.

24:21 Naq gur zna jbaqrevat ng ure uryq uvf crnpr, gb jvg jurgure gur
YBEQ unq znqr uvf wbhearl cebfcrebhf be abg.

24:22 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf gur pnzryf unq qbar qevaxvat, gung gur
zna gbbx n tbyqra rneevat bs unys n furxry jrvtug, naq gjb oenpryrgf
sbe ure unaqf bs gra furxryf jrvtug bs tbyq; 24:23 Naq fnvq, Jubfr
qnhtugre neg gubh? gryy zr, V cenl gurr: vf gurer ebbz va gul sngure'f
ubhfr sbe hf gb ybqtr va?  24:24 Naq fur fnvq hagb uvz, V nz gur
qnhtugre bs Orguhry gur fba bs Zvypnu, juvpu fur oner hagb Anube.

24:25 Fur fnvq zberbire hagb uvz, Jr unir obgu fgenj naq cebiraqre
rabhtu, naq ebbz gb ybqtr va.

24:26 Naq gur zna objrq qbja uvf urnq, naq jbefuvccrq gur YBEQ.

24:27 Naq ur fnvq, Oyrffrq or gur YBEQ Tbq bs zl znfgre Noenunz, jub
ungu abg yrsg qrfgvghgr zl znfgre bs uvf zrepl naq uvf gehgu: V orvat
va gur jnl, gur YBEQ yrq zr gb gur ubhfr bs zl znfgre'f oerguera.

24:28 Naq gur qnzfry ena, naq gbyq gurz bs ure zbgure'f ubhfr gurfr
guvatf.

24:29 Naq Erorxnu unq n oebgure, naq uvf anzr jnf Ynona: naq Ynona ena
bhg hagb gur zna, hagb gur jryy.

24:30 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura ur fnj gur rneevat naq oenpryrgf hcba
uvf fvfgre'f unaqf, naq jura ur urneq gur jbeqf bs Erorxnu uvf fvfgre,
fnlvat, Guhf fcnxr gur zna hagb zr; gung ur pnzr hagb gur zna; naq,
orubyq, ur fgbbq ol gur pnzryf ng gur jryy.

24:31 Naq ur fnvq, Pbzr va, gubh oyrffrq bs gur YBEQ; jurersber
fgnaqrfg gubh jvgubhg? sbe V unir cercnerq gur ubhfr, naq ebbz sbe gur
pnzryf.

24:32 Naq gur zna pnzr vagb gur ubhfr: naq ur hatveqrq uvf pnzryf, naq
tnir fgenj naq cebiraqre sbe gur pnzryf, naq jngre gb jnfu uvf srrg,
naq gur zra'f srrg gung jrer jvgu uvz.

24:33 Naq gurer jnf frg zrng orsber uvz gb rng: ohg ur fnvq, V jvyy
abg rng, hagvy V unir gbyq zvar reenaq. Naq ur fnvq, Fcrnx ba.

24:34 Naq ur fnvq, V nz Noenunz'f freinag.

24:35 Naq gur YBEQ ungu oyrffrq zl znfgre terngyl; naq ur vf orpbzr
terng: naq ur ungu tvira uvz sybpxf, naq ureqf, naq fvyire, naq tbyq,
naq zrafreinagf, naq znvqfreinagf, naq pnzryf, naq nffrf.

24:36 Naq Fnenu zl znfgre'f jvsr oner n fba gb zl znfgre jura fur jnf
byq: naq hagb uvz ungu ur tvira nyy gung ur ungu.

24:37 Naq zl znfgre znqr zr fjrne, fnlvat, Gubh funyg abg gnxr n jvsr
gb zl fba bs gur qnhtugref bs gur Pnannavgrf, va jubfr ynaq V qjryy:
24:38 Ohg gubh funyg tb hagb zl sngure'f ubhfr, naq gb zl xvaqerq, naq
gnxr n jvsr hagb zl fba.

24:39 Naq V fnvq hagb zl znfgre, Crenqiragher gur jbzna jvyy abg
sbyybj zr.

24:40 Naq ur fnvq hagb zr, Gur YBEQ, orsber jubz V jnyx, jvyy fraq uvf
natry jvgu gurr, naq cebfcre gul jnl; naq gubh funyg gnxr n jvsr sbe
zl fba bs zl xvaqerq, naq bs zl sngure'f ubhfr: 24:41 Gura funyg gubh
or pyrne sebz guvf zl bngu, jura gubh pbzrfg gb zl xvaqerq; naq vs
gurl tvir abg gurr bar, gubh funyg or pyrne sebz zl bngu.

24:42 Naq V pnzr guvf qnl hagb gur jryy, naq fnvq, B YBEQ Tbq bs zl
znfgre Noenunz, vs abj gubh qb cebfcre zl jnl juvpu V tb: 24:43
Orubyq, V fgnaq ol gur jryy bs jngre; naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, gung
jura gur ivetva pbzrgu sbegu gb qenj jngre, naq V fnl gb ure, Tvir zr,
V cenl gurr, n yvggyr jngre bs gul cvgpure gb qevax; 24:44 Naq fur fnl
gb zr, Obgu qevax gubh, naq V jvyy nyfb qenj sbe gul pnzryf: yrg gur
fnzr or gur jbzna jubz gur YBEQ ungu nccbvagrq bhg sbe zl znfgre'f
fba.

24:45 Naq orsber V unq qbar fcrnxvat va zvar urneg, orubyq, Erorxnu
pnzr sbegu jvgu ure cvgpure ba ure fubhyqre; naq fur jrag qbja hagb
gur jryy, naq qerj jngre: naq V fnvq hagb ure, Yrg zr qevax, V cenl
gurr.

24:46 Naq fur znqr unfgr, naq yrg qbja ure cvgpure sebz ure fubhyqre,
naq fnvq, Qevax, naq V jvyy tvir gul pnzryf qevax nyfb: fb V qenax,
naq fur znqr gur pnzryf qevax nyfb.

24:47 Naq V nfxrq ure, naq fnvq, Jubfr qnhtugre neg gubh? Naq fur
fnvq, gur qnhtugre bs Orguhry, Anube'f fba, jubz Zvypnu oner hagb uvz:
naq V chg gur rneevat hcba ure snpr, naq gur oenpryrgf hcba ure unaqf.

24:48 Naq V objrq qbja zl urnq, naq jbefuvccrq gur YBEQ, naq oyrffrq
gur YBEQ Tbq bs zl znfgre Noenunz, juvpu unq yrq zr va gur evtug jnl
gb gnxr zl znfgre'f oebgure'f qnhtugre hagb uvf fba.

24:49 Naq abj vs lr jvyy qrny xvaqyl naq gehyl jvgu zl znfgre, gryy
zr: naq vs abg, gryy zr; gung V znl ghea gb gur evtug unaq, be gb gur
yrsg.

24:50 Gura Ynona naq Orguhry nafjrerq naq fnvq, Gur guvat cebprrqrgu
sebz gur YBEQ: jr pnaabg fcrnx hagb gurr onq be tbbq.

24:51 Orubyq, Erorxnu vf orsber gurr, gnxr ure, naq tb, naq yrg ure or
gul znfgre'f fba'f jvsr, nf gur YBEQ ungu fcbxra.

24:52 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung, jura Noenunz'f freinag urneq gurve
jbeqf, ur jbefuvccrq gur YBEQ, objvat uvzfrys gb gur rnegu.

24:53 Naq gur freinag oebhtug sbegu wrjryf bs fvyire, naq wrjryf bs
tbyq, naq envzrag, naq tnir gurz gb Erorxnu: ur tnir nyfb gb ure
oebgure naq gb ure zbgure cerpvbhf guvatf.

24:54 Naq gurl qvq rng naq qevax, ur naq gur zra gung jrer jvgu uvz,
naq gneevrq nyy avtug; naq gurl ebfr hc va gur zbeavat, naq ur fnvq,
Fraq zr njnl hagb zl znfgre.

24:55 Naq ure oebgure naq ure zbgure fnvq, Yrg gur qnzfry novqr jvgu
hf n srj qnlf, ng gur yrnfg gra; nsgre gung fur funyy tb.

24:56 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Uvaqre zr abg, frrvat gur YBEQ ungu
cebfcrerq zl jnl; fraq zr njnl gung V znl tb gb zl znfgre.

24:57 Naq gurl fnvq, Jr jvyy pnyy gur qnzfry, naq radhver ng ure
zbhgu.

24:58 Naq gurl pnyyrq Erorxnu, naq fnvq hagb ure, Jvyg gubh tb jvgu
guvf zna? Naq fur fnvq, V jvyy tb.

24:59 Naq gurl frag njnl Erorxnu gurve fvfgre, naq ure ahefr, naq
Noenunz'f freinag, naq uvf zra.

24:60 Naq gurl oyrffrq Erorxnu, naq fnvq hagb ure, Gubh neg bhe
fvfgre, or gubh gur zbgure bs gubhfnaqf bs zvyyvbaf, naq yrg gul frrq
cbffrff gur tngr bs gubfr juvpu ungr gurz.

24:61 Naq Erorxnu nebfr, naq ure qnzfryf, naq gurl ebqr hcba gur
pnzryf, naq sbyybjrq gur zna: naq gur freinag gbbx Erorxnu, naq jrag
uvf jnl.

24:62 Naq Vfnnp pnzr sebz gur jnl bs gur jryy Ynunvebv; sbe ur qjryg
va gur fbhgu pbhagel.

24:63 Naq Vfnnp jrag bhg gb zrqvgngr va gur svryq ng gur riragvqr: naq
ur yvsgrq hc uvf rlrf, naq fnj, naq, orubyq, gur pnzryf jrer pbzvat.

24:64 Naq Erorxnu yvsgrq hc ure rlrf, naq jura fur fnj Vfnnp, fur
yvtugrq bss gur pnzry.

24:65 Sbe fur unq fnvq hagb gur freinag, Jung zna vf guvf gung jnyxrgu
va gur svryq gb zrrg hf? Naq gur freinag unq fnvq, Vg vf zl znfgre:
gurersber fur gbbx n invy, naq pbirerq urefrys.

24:66 Naq gur freinag gbyq Vfnnp nyy guvatf gung ur unq qbar.

24:67 Naq Vfnnp oebhtug ure vagb uvf zbgure Fnenu'f grag, naq gbbx
Erorxnu, naq fur orpnzr uvf jvsr; naq ur ybirq ure: naq Vfnnp jnf
pbzsbegrq nsgre uvf zbgure'f qrngu.

25:1 Gura ntnva Noenunz gbbx n jvsr, naq ure anzr jnf Xrghenu.

25:2 Naq fur oner uvz Mvzena, naq Wbxfuna, naq Zrqna, naq Zvqvna, naq
Vfuonx, naq Fuhnu.

25:3 Naq Wbxfuna ortng Furon, naq Qrqna. Naq gur fbaf bs Qrqna jrer
Nffuhevz, naq Yrghfuvz, naq Yrhzzvz.

25:4 Naq gur fbaf bs Zvqvna; Rcunu, naq Rcure, naq Unabpu, naq Novqnu,
naq Ryqnnu. Nyy gurfr jrer gur puvyqera bs Xrghenu.

25:5 Naq Noenunz tnir nyy gung ur unq hagb Vfnnp.

25:6 Ohg hagb gur fbaf bs gur pbaphovarf, juvpu Noenunz unq, Noenunz
tnir tvsgf, naq frag gurz njnl sebz Vfnnp uvf fba, juvyr ur lrg yvirq,
rnfgjneq, hagb gur rnfg pbhagel.

25:7 Naq gurfr ner gur qnlf bs gur lrnef bs Noenunz'f yvsr juvpu ur
yvirq, na uhaqerq guerrfpber naq svsgrra lrnef.

25:8 Gura Noenunz tnir hc gur tubfg, naq qvrq va n tbbq byq ntr, na
byq zna, naq shyy bs lrnef; naq jnf tngurerq gb uvf crbcyr.

25:9 Naq uvf fbaf Vfnnp naq Vfuznry ohevrq uvz va gur pnir bs
Znpucrynu, va gur svryq bs Rcueba gur fba bs Mbune gur Uvggvgr, juvpu
vf orsber Znzer; 25:10 Gur svryq juvpu Noenunz chepunfrq bs gur fbaf
bs Urgu: gurer jnf Noenunz ohevrq, naq Fnenu uvf jvsr.

25:11 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre gur qrngu bs Noenunz, gung Tbq oyrffrq
uvf fba Vfnnp; naq Vfnnp qjryg ol gur jryy Ynunvebv.

25:12 Abj gurfr ner gur trarengvbaf bs Vfuznry, Noenunz'f fba, jubz
Untne gur Rtlcgvna, Fnenu'f unaqznvq, oner hagb Noenunz: 25:13 Naq
gurfr ner gur anzrf bs gur fbaf bs Vfuznry, ol gurve anzrf, nppbeqvat
gb gurve trarengvbaf: gur svefgobea bs Vfuznry, Aronwbgu; naq Xrqne,
naq Nqorry, naq Zvofnz, 25:14 Naq Zvfuzn, naq Qhznu, naq Znffn, 25:15
Unqne, naq Grzn, Wrghe, Ancuvfu, naq Xrqrznu: 25:16 Gurfr ner gur fbaf
bs Vfuznry, naq gurfr ner gurve anzrf, ol gurve gbjaf, naq ol gurve
pnfgyrf; gjryir cevaprf nppbeqvat gb gurve angvbaf.

25:17 Naq gurfr ner gur lrnef bs gur yvsr bs Vfuznry, na uhaqerq naq
guvegl naq frira lrnef: naq ur tnir hc gur tubfg naq qvrq; naq jnf
tngurerq hagb uvf crbcyr.

25:18 Naq gurl qjryg sebz Univynu hagb Fuhe, gung vf orsber Rtlcg, nf
gubh tbrfg gbjneq Nfflevn: naq ur qvrq va gur cerfrapr bs nyy uvf
oerguera.

25:19 Naq gurfr ner gur trarengvbaf bs Vfnnp, Noenunz'f fba: Noenunz
ortng Vfnnp: 25:20 Naq Vfnnp jnf sbegl lrnef byq jura ur gbbx Erorxnu
gb jvsr, gur qnhtugre bs Orguhry gur Flevna bs Cnqnanenz, gur fvfgre
gb Ynona gur Flevna.

25:21 Naq Vfnnp vagerngrq gur YBEQ sbe uvf jvsr, orpnhfr fur jnf
oneera: naq gur YBEQ jnf vagerngrq bs uvz, naq Erorxnu uvf jvsr
pbaprvirq.

25:22 Naq gur puvyqera fgehttyrq gbtrgure jvguva ure; naq fur fnvq, Vs
vg or fb, jul nz V guhf? Naq fur jrag gb radhver bs gur YBEQ.

25:23 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb ure, Gjb angvbaf ner va gul jbzo, naq gjb
znaare bs crbcyr funyy or frcnengrq sebz gul objryf; naq gur bar
crbcyr funyy or fgebatre guna gur bgure crbcyr; naq gur ryqre funyy
freir gur lbhatre.

25:24 Naq jura ure qnlf gb or qryvirerq jrer shysvyyrq, orubyq, gurer
jrer gjvaf va ure jbzo.

25:25 Naq gur svefg pnzr bhg erq, nyy bire yvxr na unvel tnezrag; naq
gurl pnyyrq uvf anzr Rfnh.

25:26 Naq nsgre gung pnzr uvf oebgure bhg, naq uvf unaq gbbx ubyq ba
Rfnh'f urry; naq uvf anzr jnf pnyyrq Wnpbo: naq Vfnnp jnf guerrfpber
lrnef byq jura fur oner gurz.

25:27 Naq gur oblf terj: naq Rfnh jnf n phaavat uhagre, n zna bs gur
svryq; naq Wnpbo jnf n cynva zna, qjryyvat va gragf.

25:28 Naq Vfnnp ybirq Rfnh, orpnhfr ur qvq rng bs uvf iravfba: ohg
Erorxnu ybirq Wnpbo.

25:29 Naq Wnpbo fbq cbggntr: naq Rfnh pnzr sebz gur svryq, naq ur jnf
snvag: 25:30 Naq Rfnh fnvq gb Wnpbo, Srrq zr, V cenl gurr, jvgu gung
fnzr erq cbggntr; sbe V nz snvag: gurersber jnf uvf anzr pnyyrq Rqbz.

25:31 Naq Wnpbo fnvq, Fryy zr guvf qnl gul oveguevtug.

25:32 Naq Rfnh fnvq, Orubyq, V nz ng gur cbvag gb qvr: naq jung cebsvg
funyy guvf oveguevtug qb gb zr?  25:33 Naq Wnpbo fnvq, Fjrne gb zr
guvf qnl; naq ur fjner hagb uvz: naq ur fbyq uvf oveguevtug hagb
Wnpbo.

25:34 Gura Wnpbo tnir Rfnh oernq naq cbggntr bs yragvyrf; naq ur qvq
rng naq qevax, naq ebfr hc, naq jrag uvf jnl: guhf Rfnh qrfcvfrq uvf
oveguevtug.

26:1 Naq gurer jnf n snzvar va gur ynaq, orfvqr gur svefg snzvar gung
jnf va gur qnlf bs Noenunz. Naq Vfnnp jrag hagb Novzryrpu xvat bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf hagb Trene.

26:2 Naq gur YBEQ nccrnerq hagb uvz, naq fnvq, Tb abg qbja vagb Rtlcg;
qjryy va gur ynaq juvpu V funyy gryy gurr bs: 26:3 Fbwbhea va guvf
ynaq, naq V jvyy or jvgu gurr, naq jvyy oyrff gurr; sbe hagb gurr, naq
hagb gul frrq, V jvyy tvir nyy gurfr pbhagevrf, naq V jvyy cresbez gur
bngu juvpu V fjner hagb Noenunz gul sngure; 26:4 Naq V jvyy znxr gul
frrq gb zhygvcyl nf gur fgnef bs urnira, naq jvyy tvir hagb gul frrq
nyy gurfr pbhagevrf; naq va gul frrq funyy nyy gur angvbaf bs gur
rnegu or oyrffrq; 26:5 Orpnhfr gung Noenunz borlrq zl ibvpr, naq xrcg
zl punetr, zl pbzznaqzragf, zl fgnghgrf, naq zl ynjf.

26:6 Naq Vfnnp qjryg va Trene: 26:7 Naq gur zra bs gur cynpr nfxrq uvz
bs uvf jvsr; naq ur fnvq, Fur vf zl fvfgre: sbe ur srnerq gb fnl, Fur
vf zl jvsr; yrfg, fnvq ur, gur zra bs gur cynpr fubhyq xvyy zr sbe
Erorxnu; orpnhfr fur jnf snve gb ybbx hcba.

26:8 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura ur unq orra gurer n ybat gvzr, gung
Novzryrpu xvat bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf ybbxrq bhg ng n jvaqbj, naq fnj,
naq, orubyq, Vfnnp jnf fcbegvat jvgu Erorxnu uvf jvsr.

26:9 Naq Novzryrpu pnyyrq Vfnnp, naq fnvq, Orubyq, bs n fhergl fur vf
gul jvsr; naq ubj fnvqfg gubh, Fur vf zl fvfgre? Naq Vfnnp fnvq hagb
uvz, Orpnhfr V fnvq, Yrfg V qvr sbe ure.

26:10 Naq Novzryrpu fnvq, Jung vf guvf gubh unfg qbar hagb hf? bar bs
gur crbcyr zvtug yvtugyl unir yvra jvgu gul jvsr, naq gubh fubhyqrfg
unir oebhtug thvygvarff hcba hf.

26:11 Naq Novzryrpu punetrq nyy uvf crbcyr, fnlvat, Ur gung gbhpurgu
guvf zna be uvf jvsr funyy fheryl or chg gb qrngu.

26:12 Gura Vfnnp fbjrq va gung ynaq, naq erprvirq va gur fnzr lrne na
uhaqerqsbyq: naq gur YBEQ oyrffrq uvz.

26:13 Naq gur zna jnkrq terng, naq jrag sbejneq, naq terj hagvy ur
orpnzr irel terng: 26:14 Sbe ur unq cbffrffvba bs sybpxf, naq
cbffrffvba bs ureqf, naq terng fgber bs freinagf: naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf
raivrq uvz.

26:15 Sbe nyy gur jryyf juvpu uvf sngure'f freinagf unq qvttrq va gur
qnlf bs Noenunz uvf sngure, gur Cuvyvfgvarf unq fgbccrq gurz, naq
svyyrq gurz jvgu rnegu.

26:16 Naq Novzryrpu fnvq hagb Vfnnp, Tb sebz hf; sbe gubh neg zhpu
zvtugvre guna jr.

26:17 Naq Vfnnp qrcnegrq gurapr, naq cvgpurq uvf grag va gur inyyrl bs
Trene, naq qjryg gurer.

26:18 Naq Vfnnp qvttrq ntnva gur jryyf bs jngre, juvpu gurl unq qvttrq
va gur qnlf bs Noenunz uvf sngure; sbe gur Cuvyvfgvarf unq fgbccrq
gurz nsgre gur qrngu bs Noenunz: naq ur pnyyrq gurve anzrf nsgre gur
anzrf ol juvpu uvf sngure unq pnyyrq gurz.

26:19 Naq Vfnnp'f freinagf qvttrq va gur inyyrl, naq sbhaq gurer n
jryy bs fcevatvat jngre.

26:20 Naq gur ureqzra bs Trene qvq fgevir jvgu Vfnnp'f ureqzra,
fnlvat, Gur jngre vf bhef: naq ur pnyyrq gur anzr bs gur jryy Rfrx;
orpnhfr gurl fgebir jvgu uvz.

26:21 Naq gurl qvttrq nabgure jryy, naq fgebir sbe gung nyfb: naq ur
pnyyrq gur anzr bs vg Fvganu.

26:22 Naq ur erzbirq sebz gurapr, naq qvttrq nabgure jryy; naq sbe
gung gurl fgebir abg: naq ur pnyyrq gur anzr bs vg Erubobgu; naq ur
fnvq, Sbe abj gur YBEQ ungu znqr ebbz sbe hf, naq jr funyy or sehvgshy
va gur ynaq.

26:23 Naq ur jrag hc sebz gurapr gb Orrefuron.

26:24 Naq gur YBEQ nccrnerq hagb uvz gur fnzr avtug, naq fnvq, V nz
gur Tbq bs Noenunz gul sngure: srne abg, sbe V nz jvgu gurr, naq jvyy
oyrff gurr, naq zhygvcyl gul frrq sbe zl freinag Noenunz'f fnxr.

26:25 Naq ur ohvyqrq na nygne gurer, naq pnyyrq hcba gur anzr bs gur
YBEQ, naq cvgpurq uvf grag gurer: naq gurer Vfnnp'f freinagf qvttrq n
jryy.

26:26 Gura Novzryrpu jrag gb uvz sebz Trene, naq Nuhmmngu bar bs uvf
sevraqf, naq Cuvpuby gur puvrs pncgnva bs uvf nezl.

26:27 Naq Vfnnp fnvq hagb gurz, Jurersber pbzr lr gb zr, frrvat lr
ungr zr, naq unir frag zr njnl sebz lbh?  26:28 Naq gurl fnvq, Jr fnj
pregnvayl gung gur YBEQ jnf jvgu gurr: naq jr fnvq, Yrg gurer or abj
na bngu orgjvkg hf, rira orgjvkg hf naq gurr, naq yrg hf znxr n
pbiranag jvgu gurr; 26:29 Gung gubh jvyg qb hf ab uheg, nf jr unir abg
gbhpurq gurr, naq nf jr unir qbar hagb gurr abguvat ohg tbbq, naq unir
frag gurr njnl va crnpr: gubh neg abj gur oyrffrq bs gur YBEQ.

26:30 Naq ur znqr gurz n srnfg, naq gurl qvq rng naq qevax.

26:31 Naq gurl ebfr hc orgvzrf va gur zbeavat, naq fjner bar gb
nabgure: naq Vfnnp frag gurz njnl, naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz uvz va
crnpr.

26:32 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff gur fnzr qnl, gung Vfnnp'f freinagf pnzr,
naq gbyq uvz pbapreavat gur jryy juvpu gurl unq qvttrq, naq fnvq hagb
uvz, Jr unir sbhaq jngre.

26:33 Naq ur pnyyrq vg Furonu: gurersber gur anzr bs gur pvgl vf
Orrefuron hagb guvf qnl.

26:34 Naq Rfnh jnf sbegl lrnef byq jura ur gbbx gb jvsr Whqvgu gur
qnhtugre bs Orrev gur Uvggvgr, naq Onfurzngu gur qnhtugre bs Ryba gur
Uvggvgr: 26:35 Juvpu jrer n tevrs bs zvaq hagb Vfnnp naq gb Erorxnu.

27:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung jura Vfnnp jnf byq, naq uvf rlrf jrer
qvz, fb gung ur pbhyq abg frr, ur pnyyrq Rfnh uvf ryqrfg fba, naq fnvq
hagb uvz, Zl fba: naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Orubyq, urer nz V.

27:2 Naq ur fnvq, Orubyq abj, V nz byq, V xabj abg gur qnl bs zl
qrngu: 27:3 Abj gurersber gnxr, V cenl gurr, gul jrncbaf, gul dhvire
naq gul obj, naq tb bhg gb gur svryq, naq gnxr zr fbzr iravfba; 27:4
Naq znxr zr fnibhel zrng, fhpu nf V ybir, naq oevat vg gb zr, gung V
znl rng; gung zl fbhy znl oyrff gurr orsber V qvr.

27:5 Naq Erorxnu urneq jura Vfnnp fcnxr gb Rfnh uvf fba. Naq Rfnh jrag
gb gur svryq gb uhag sbe iravfba, naq gb oevat vg.

27:6 Naq Erorxnu fcnxr hagb Wnpbo ure fba, fnlvat, Orubyq, V urneq gul
sngure fcrnx hagb Rfnh gul oebgure, fnlvat, 27:7 Oevat zr iravfba, naq
znxr zr fnibhel zrng, gung V znl rng, naq oyrff gurr orsber gur YBEQ
orsber zl qrngu.

27:8 Abj gurersber, zl fba, borl zl ibvpr nppbeqvat gb gung juvpu V
pbzznaq gurr.

27:9 Tb abj gb gur sybpx, naq srgpu zr sebz gurapr gjb tbbq xvqf bs
gur tbngf; naq V jvyy znxr gurz fnibhel zrng sbe gul sngure, fhpu nf
ur ybirgu: 27:10 Naq gubh funyg oevat vg gb gul sngure, gung ur znl
rng, naq gung ur znl oyrff gurr orsber uvf qrngu.

27:11 Naq Wnpbo fnvq gb Erorxnu uvf zbgure, Orubyq, Rfnh zl oebgure vf
n unvel zna, naq V nz n fzbbgu zna: 27:12 Zl sngure crenqiragher jvyy
srry zr, naq V funyy frrz gb uvz nf n qrprvire; naq V funyy oevat n
phefr hcba zr, naq abg n oyrffvat.

27:13 Naq uvf zbgure fnvq hagb uvz, Hcba zr or gul phefr, zl fba: bayl
borl zl ibvpr, naq tb srgpu zr gurz.

27:14 Naq ur jrag, naq srgpurq, naq oebhtug gurz gb uvf zbgure: naq
uvf zbgure znqr fnibhel zrng, fhpu nf uvf sngure ybirq.

27:15 Naq Erorxnu gbbx tbbqyl envzrag bs ure ryqrfg fba Rfnh, juvpu
jrer jvgu ure va gur ubhfr, naq chg gurz hcba Wnpbo ure lbhatre fba:
27:16 Naq fur chg gur fxvaf bs gur xvqf bs gur tbngf hcba uvf unaqf,
naq hcba gur fzbbgu bs uvf arpx: 27:17 Naq fur tnir gur fnibhel zrng
naq gur oernq, juvpu fur unq cercnerq, vagb gur unaq bs ure fba Wnpbo.

27:18 Naq ur pnzr hagb uvf sngure, naq fnvq, Zl sngure: naq ur fnvq,
Urer nz V; jub neg gubh, zl fba?  27:19 Naq Wnpbo fnvq hagb uvf
sngure, V nz Rfnh gul svefg obea; V unir qbar nppbeqvat nf gubh onqrfg
zr: nevfr, V cenl gurr, fvg naq rng bs zl iravfba, gung gul fbhy znl
oyrff zr.

27:20 Naq Vfnnp fnvq hagb uvf fba, Ubj vf vg gung gubh unfg sbhaq vg
fb dhvpxyl, zl fba? Naq ur fnvq, Orpnhfr gur YBEQ gul Tbq oebhtug vg
gb zr.

27:21 Naq Vfnnp fnvq hagb Wnpbo, Pbzr arne, V cenl gurr, gung V znl
srry gurr, zl fba, jurgure gubh or zl irel fba Rfnh be abg.

27:22 Naq Wnpbo jrag arne hagb Vfnnp uvf sngure; naq ur sryg uvz, naq
fnvq, Gur ibvpr vf Wnpbo'f ibvpr, ohg gur unaqf ner gur unaqf bs Rfnh.

27:23 Naq ur qvfprearq uvz abg, orpnhfr uvf unaqf jrer unvel, nf uvf
oebgure Rfnh'f unaqf: fb ur oyrffrq uvz.

27:24 Naq ur fnvq, Neg gubh zl irel fba Rfnh? Naq ur fnvq, V nz.

27:25 Naq ur fnvq, Oevat vg arne gb zr, naq V jvyy rng bs zl fba'f
iravfba, gung zl fbhy znl oyrff gurr. Naq ur oebhtug vg arne gb uvz,
naq ur qvq rng: naq ur oebhtug uvz jvar naq ur qenax.

27:26 Naq uvf sngure Vfnnp fnvq hagb uvz, Pbzr arne abj, naq xvff zr,
zl fba.

27:27 Naq ur pnzr arne, naq xvffrq uvz: naq ur fzryyrq gur fzryy bs
uvf envzrag, naq oyrffrq uvz, naq fnvq, Frr, gur fzryy bs zl fba vf nf
gur fzryy bs n svryq juvpu gur YBEQ ungu oyrffrq: 27:28 Gurersber Tbq
tvir gurr bs gur qrj bs urnira, naq gur sngarff bs gur rnegu, naq
cyragl bs pbea naq jvar: 27:29 Yrg crbcyr freir gurr, naq angvbaf obj
qbja gb gurr: or ybeq bire gul oerguera, naq yrg gul zbgure'f fbaf obj
qbja gb gurr: phefrq or rirel bar gung phefrgu gurr, naq oyrffrq or ur
gung oyrffrgu gurr.

27:30 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf fbba nf Vfnnp unq znqr na raq bs
oyrffvat Wnpbo, naq Wnpbo jnf lrg fpnepr tbar bhg sebz gur cerfrapr bs
Vfnnp uvf sngure, gung Rfnh uvf oebgure pnzr va sebz uvf uhagvat.

27:31 Naq ur nyfb unq znqr fnibhel zrng, naq oebhtug vg hagb uvf
sngure, naq fnvq hagb uvf sngure, Yrg zl sngure nevfr, naq rng bs uvf
fba'f iravfba, gung gul fbhy znl oyrff zr.

27:32 Naq Vfnnp uvf sngure fnvq hagb uvz, Jub neg gubh? Naq ur fnvq, V
nz gul fba, gul svefgobea Rfnh.

27:33 Naq Vfnnp gerzoyrq irel rkprrqvatyl, naq fnvq, Jub? jurer vf ur
gung ungu gnxra iravfba, naq oebhtug vg zr, naq V unir rngra bs nyy
orsber gubh pnzrfg, naq unir oyrffrq uvz? lrn, naq ur funyy or
oyrffrq.

27:34 Naq jura Rfnh urneq gur jbeqf bs uvf sngure, ur pevrq jvgu n
terng naq rkprrqvat ovggre pel, naq fnvq hagb uvf sngure, Oyrff zr,
rira zr nyfb, B zl sngure.

27:35 Naq ur fnvq, Gul oebgure pnzr jvgu fhogvygl, naq ungu gnxra njnl
gul oyrffvat.

27:36 Naq ur fnvq, Vf abg ur evtugyl anzrq Wnpbo? sbe ur ungu
fhccynagrq zr gurfr gjb gvzrf: ur gbbx njnl zl oveguevtug; naq,
orubyq, abj ur ungu gnxra njnl zl oyrffvat. Naq ur fnvq, Unfg gubh abg
erfreirq n oyrffvat sbe zr?  27:37 Naq Vfnnp nafjrerq naq fnvq hagb
Rfnh, Orubyq, V unir znqr uvz gul ybeq, naq nyy uvf oerguera unir V
tvira gb uvz sbe freinagf; naq jvgu pbea naq jvar unir V fhfgnvarq
uvz: naq jung funyy V qb abj hagb gurr, zl fba?  27:38 Naq Rfnh fnvq
hagb uvf sngure, Unfg gubh ohg bar oyrffvat, zl sngure? oyrff zr, rira
zr nyfb, B zl sngure. Naq Rfnh yvsgrq hc uvf ibvpr, naq jrcg.

27:39 Naq Vfnnp uvf sngure nafjrerq naq fnvq hagb uvz, Orubyq, gul
qjryyvat funyy or gur sngarff bs gur rnegu, naq bs gur qrj bs urnira
sebz nobir; 27:40 Naq ol gul fjbeq funyg gubh yvir, naq funyg freir
gul oebgure; naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff jura gubh funyg unir gur
qbzvavba, gung gubh funyg oernx uvf lbxr sebz bss gul arpx.

27:41 Naq Rfnh ungrq Wnpbo orpnhfr bs gur oyrffvat jurerjvgu uvf
sngure oyrffrq uvz: naq Rfnh fnvq va uvf urneg, Gur qnlf bs zbheavat
sbe zl sngure ner ng unaq; gura jvyy V fynl zl oebgure Wnpbo.

27:42 Naq gurfr jbeqf bs Rfnh ure ryqre fba jrer gbyq gb Erorxnu: naq
fur frag naq pnyyrq Wnpbo ure lbhatre fba, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Orubyq,
gul oebgure Rfnh, nf gbhpuvat gurr, qbgu pbzsbeg uvzfrys, checbfvat gb
xvyy gurr.

27:43 Abj gurersber, zl fba, borl zl ibvpr; nevfr, syrr gubh gb Ynona
zl oebgure gb Unena; 27:44 Naq gneel jvgu uvz n srj qnlf, hagvy gul
oebgure'f shel ghea njnl; 27:45 Hagvy gul oebgure'f natre ghea njnl
sebz gurr, naq ur sbetrg gung juvpu gubh unfg qbar gb uvz: gura V jvyy
fraq, naq srgpu gurr sebz gurapr: jul fubhyq V or qrcevirq nyfb bs lbh
obgu va bar qnl?  27:46 Naq Erorxnu fnvq gb Vfnnp, V nz jrnel bs zl
yvsr orpnhfr bs gur qnhtugref bs Urgu: vs Wnpbo gnxr n jvsr bs gur
qnhtugref bs Urgu, fhpu nf gurfr juvpu ner bs gur qnhtugref bs gur
ynaq, jung tbbq funyy zl yvsr qb zr?  28:1 Naq Vfnnp pnyyrq Wnpbo, naq
oyrffrq uvz, naq punetrq uvz, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Gubh funyg abg gnxr n
jvsr bs gur qnhtugref bs Pnanna.

28:2 Nevfr, tb gb Cnqnanenz, gb gur ubhfr bs Orguhry gul zbgure'f
sngure; naq gnxr gurr n jvsr sebz gurapr bs gur qnhturef bs Ynona gul
zbgure'f oebgure.

28:3 Naq Tbq Nyzvtugl oyrff gurr, naq znxr gurr sehvgshy, naq zhygvcyl
gurr, gung gubh znlrfg or n zhygvghqr bs crbcyr; 28:4 Naq tvir gurr
gur oyrffvat bs Noenunz, gb gurr, naq gb gul frrq jvgu gurr; gung gubh
znlrfg vaurevg gur ynaq jurerva gubh neg n fgenatre, juvpu Tbq tnir
hagb Noenunz.

28:5 Naq Vfnnp frag njnl Wnpbo: naq ur jrag gb Cnqnanenz hagb Ynona,
fba bs Orguhry gur Flevna, gur oebgure bs Erorxnu, Wnpbo'f naq Rfnh'f
zbgure.

28:6 Jura Rfnh fnj gung Vfnnp unq oyrffrq Wnpbo, naq frag uvz njnl gb
Cnqnanenz, gb gnxr uvz n jvsr sebz gurapr; naq gung nf ur oyrffrq uvz
ur tnir uvz n punetr, fnlvat, Gubh funyg abg gnxr n jvsr bs gur
qnhturef bs Pnanna; 28:7 Naq gung Wnpbo borlrq uvf sngure naq uvf
zbgure, naq jnf tbar gb Cnqnanenz; 28:8 Naq Rfnh frrvat gung gur
qnhtugref bs Pnanna cyrnfrq abg Vfnnp uvf sngure; 28:9 Gura jrag Rfnh
hagb Vfuznry, naq gbbx hagb gur jvirf juvpu ur unq Znunyngu gur
qnhtugre bs Vfuznry Noenunz'f fba, gur fvfgre bs Aronwbgu, gb or uvf
jvsr.

28:10 Naq Wnpbo jrag bhg sebz Orrefuron, naq jrag gbjneq Unena.

28:11 Naq ur yvtugrq hcba n pregnva cynpr, naq gneevrq gurer nyy
avtug, orpnhfr gur fha jnf frg; naq ur gbbx bs gur fgbarf bs gung
cynpr, naq chg gurz sbe uvf cvyybjf, naq ynl qbja va gung cynpr gb
fyrrc.

28:12 Naq ur qernzrq, naq orubyq n ynqqre frg hc ba gur rnegu, naq gur
gbc bs vg ernpurq gb urnira: naq orubyq gur natryf bs Tbq nfpraqvat
naq qrfpraqvat ba vg.

28:13 Naq, orubyq, gur YBEQ fgbbq nobir vg, naq fnvq, V nz gur YBEQ
Tbq bs Noenunz gul sngure, naq gur Tbq bs Vfnnp: gur ynaq jurerba gubh
yvrfg, gb gurr jvyy V tvir vg, naq gb gul frrq; 28:14 Naq gul frrq
funyy or nf gur qhfg bs gur rnegu, naq gubh funyg fcernq noebnq gb gur
jrfg, naq gb gur rnfg, naq gb gur abegu, naq gb gur fbhgu: naq va gurr
naq va gul frrq funyy nyy gur snzvyvrf bs gur rnegu or oyrffrq.

28:15 Naq, orubyq, V nz jvgu gurr, naq jvyy xrrc gurr va nyy cynprf
juvgure gubh tbrfg, naq jvyy oevat gurr ntnva vagb guvf ynaq; sbe V
jvyy abg yrnir gurr, hagvy V unir qbar gung juvpu V unir fcbxra gb
gurr bs.

28:16 Naq Wnpbo njnxrq bhg bs uvf fyrrc, naq ur fnvq, Fheryl gur YBEQ
vf va guvf cynpr; naq V xarj vg abg.

28:17 Naq ur jnf nsenvq, naq fnvq, Ubj qernqshy vf guvf cynpr! guvf vf
abar bgure ohg gur ubhfr bs Tbq, naq guvf vf gur tngr bs urnira.

28:18 Naq Wnpbo ebfr hc rneyl va gur zbeavat, naq gbbx gur fgbar gung
ur unq chg sbe uvf cvyybjf, naq frg vg hc sbe n cvyyne, naq cbherq bvy
hcba gur gbc bs vg.

28:19 Naq ur pnyyrq gur anzr bs gung cynpr Orgury: ohg gur anzr bs
gung pvgl jnf pnyyrq Yhm ng gur svefg.

28:20 Naq Wnpbo ibjrq n ibj, fnlvat, Vs Tbq jvyy or jvgu zr, naq jvyy
xrrc zr va guvf jnl gung V tb, naq jvyy tvir zr oernq gb rng, naq
envzrag gb chg ba, 28:21 Fb gung V pbzr ntnva gb zl sngure'f ubhfr va
crnpr; gura funyy gur YBEQ or zl Tbq: 28:22 Naq guvf fgbar, juvpu V
unir frg sbe n cvyyne, funyy or Tbq'f ubhfr: naq bs nyy gung gubh
funyg tvir zr V jvyy fheryl tvir gur gragu hagb gurr.

29:1 Gura Wnpbo jrag ba uvf wbhearl, naq pnzr vagb gur ynaq bs gur
crbcyr bs gur rnfg.

29:2 Naq ur ybbxrq, naq orubyq n jryy va gur svryq, naq, yb, gurer
jrer guerr sybpxf bs furrc ylvat ol vg; sbe bhg bs gung jryy gurl
jngrerq gur sybpxf: naq n terng fgbar jnf hcba gur jryy'f zbhgu.

29:3 Naq guvgure jrer nyy gur sybpxf tngurerq: naq gurl ebyyrq gur
fgbar sebz gur jryy'f zbhgu, naq jngrerq gur furrc, naq chg gur fgbar
ntnva hcba gur jryy'f zbhgu va uvf cynpr.

29:4 Naq Wnpbo fnvq hagb gurz, Zl oerguera, jurapr or lr? Naq gurl
fnvq, Bs Unena ner jr.

29:5 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Xabj lr Ynona gur fba bs Anube? Naq gurl
fnvq, Jr xabj uvz.

29:6 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Vf ur jryy? Naq gurl fnvq, Ur vf jryy:
naq, orubyq, Enpury uvf qnhtugre pbzrgu jvgu gur furrc.

29:7 Naq ur fnvq, Yb, vg vf lrg uvtu qnl, arvgure vf vg gvzr gung gur
pnggyr fubhyq or tngurerq gbtrgure: jngre lr gur furrc, naq tb naq
srrq gurz.

29:8 Naq gurl fnvq, Jr pnaabg, hagvy nyy gur sybpxf or tngurerq
gbtrgure, naq gvyy gurl ebyy gur fgbar sebz gur jryy'f zbhgu; gura jr
jngre gur furrc.

29:9 Naq juvyr ur lrg fcnxr jvgu gurz, Enpury pnzr jvgu ure sngure'f
furrc; sbe fur xrcg gurz.

29:10 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Wnpbo fnj Enpury gur qnhtugre bs Ynona
uvf zbgure'f oebgure, naq gur furrc bs Ynona uvf zbgure'f oebgure,
gung Wnpbo jrag arne, naq ebyyrq gur fgbar sebz gur jryy'f zbhgu, naq
jngrerq gur sybpx bs Ynona uvf zbgure'f oebgure.

29:11 Naq Wnpbo xvffrq Enpury, naq yvsgrq hc uvf ibvpr, naq jrcg.

29:12 Naq Wnpbo gbyq Enpury gung ur jnf ure sngure'f oebgure, naq gung
ur jnf Erorxnu'f fba: naq fur ena naq gbyq ure sngure.

29:13 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Ynona urneq gur gvqvatf bs Wnpbo uvf
fvfgre'f fba, gung ur ena gb zrrg uvz, naq rzoenprq uvz, naq xvffrq
uvz, naq oebhtug uvz gb uvf ubhfr. Naq ur gbyq Ynona nyy gurfr guvatf.

29:14 Naq Ynona fnvq gb uvz, Fheryl gubh neg zl obar naq zl syrfu. Naq
ur nobqr jvgu uvz gur fcnpr bs n zbagu.

29:15 Naq Ynona fnvq hagb Wnpbo, Orpnhfr gubh neg zl oebgure,
fubhyqrfg gubh gurersber freir zr sbe abhtug? gryy zr, jung funyy gul
jntrf or?  29:16 Naq Ynona unq gjb qnhtugref: gur anzr bs gur ryqre
jnf Yrnu, naq gur anzr bs gur lbhatre jnf Enpury.

29:17 Yrnu jnf graqre rlrq; ohg Enpury jnf ornhgvshy naq jryy
snibherq.

29:18 Naq Wnpbo ybirq Enpury; naq fnvq, V jvyy freir gurr frira lrnef
sbe Enpury gul lbhatre qnhtugre.

29:19 Naq Ynona fnvq, Vg vf orggre gung V tvir ure gb gurr, guna gung
V fubhyq tvir ure gb nabgure zna: novqr jvgu zr.

29:20 Naq Wnpbo freirq frira lrnef sbe Enpury; naq gurl frrzrq hagb
uvz ohg n srj qnlf, sbe gur ybir ur unq gb ure.

29:21 Naq Wnpbo fnvq hagb Ynona, Tvir zr zl jvsr, sbe zl qnlf ner
shysvyyrq, gung V znl tb va hagb ure.

29:22 Naq Ynona tngurerq gbtrgure nyy gur zra bs gur cynpr, naq znqr n
srnfg.

29:23 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gur riravat, gung ur gbbx Yrnu uvf
qnhtugre, naq oebhtug ure gb uvz; naq ur jrag va hagb ure.

29:24 Naq Ynona tnir hagb uvf qnhtugre Yrnu Mvycnu uvf znvq sbe na
unaqznvq.

29:25 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung va gur zbeavat, orubyq, vg jnf Yrnu:
naq ur fnvq gb Ynona, Jung vf guvf gubh unfg qbar hagb zr? qvq abg V
freir jvgu gurr sbe Enpury? jurersber gura unfg gubh orthvyrq zr?
29:26 Naq Ynona fnvq, Vg zhfg abg or fb qbar va bhe pbhagel, gb tvir
gur lbhatre orsber gur svefgobea.

29:27 Shysvy ure jrrx, naq jr jvyy tvir gurr guvf nyfb sbe gur freivpr
juvpu gubh funyg freir jvgu zr lrg frira bgure lrnef.

29:28 Naq Wnpbo qvq fb, naq shysvyyrq ure jrrx: naq ur tnir uvz Enpury
uvf qnhtugre gb jvsr nyfb.

29:29 Naq Ynona tnir gb Enpury uvf qnhtugre Ovyunu uvf unaqznvq gb or
ure znvq.

29:30 Naq ur jrag va nyfb hagb Enpury, naq ur ybirq nyfb Enpury zber
guna Yrnu, naq freirq jvgu uvz lrg frira bgure lrnef.

29:31 Naq jura gur YBEQ fnj gung Yrnu jnf ungrq, ur bcrarq ure jbzo:
ohg Enpury jnf oneera.

29:32 Naq Yrnu pbaprvirq, naq oner n fba, naq fur pnyyrq uvf anzr
Erhora: sbe fur fnvq, Fheryl gur YBEQ ungu ybbxrq hcba zl nssyvpgvba;
abj gurersber zl uhfonaq jvyy ybir zr.

29:33 Naq fur pbaprvirq ntnva, naq oner n fba; naq fnvq, Orpnhfr gur
YBEQ ungu urneq V jnf ungrq, ur ungu gurersber tvira zr guvf fba nyfb:
naq fur pnyyrq uvf anzr Fvzrba.

29:34 Naq fur pbaprvirq ntnva, naq oner n fba; naq fnvq, Abj guvf gvzr
jvyy zl uhfonaq or wbvarq hagb zr, orpnhfr V unir obea uvz guerr fbaf:
gurersber jnf uvf anzr pnyyrq Yriv.

29:35 Naq fur pbaprvirq ntnva, naq oner n fba: naq fur fnvq, Abj jvyy
V cenvfr gur YBEQ: gurersber fur pnyyrq uvf anzr Whqnu; naq yrsg
ornevat.

30:1 Naq jura Enpury fnj gung fur oner Wnpbo ab puvyqera, Enpury
raivrq ure fvfgre; naq fnvq hagb Wnpbo, Tvir zr puvyqera, be ryfr V
qvr.

30:2 Naq Wnpbo'f natre jnf xvaqyrq ntnvafg Enpury: naq ur fnvq, Nz V
va Tbq'f fgrnq, jub ungu jvguuryq sebz gurr gur sehvg bs gur jbzo?
30:3 Naq fur fnvq, Orubyq zl znvq Ovyunu, tb va hagb ure; naq fur
funyy orne hcba zl xarrf, gung V znl nyfb unir puvyqera ol ure.

30:4 Naq fur tnir uvz Ovyunu ure unaqznvq gb jvsr: naq Wnpbo jrag va
hagb ure.

30:5 Naq Ovyunu pbaprvirq, naq oner Wnpbo n fba.

30:6 Naq Enpury fnvq, Tbq ungu whqtrq zr, naq ungu nyfb urneq zl
ibvpr, naq ungu tvira zr n fba: gurersber pnyyrq fur uvf anzr Qna.

30:7 Naq Ovyunu Enpury'f znvq pbaprvirq ntnva, naq oner Wnpbo n frpbaq
fba.

30:8 Naq Enpury fnvq, Jvgu terng jerfgyvatf unir V jerfgyrq jvgu zl
fvfgre, naq V unir cerinvyrq: naq fur pnyyrq uvf anzr Ancugnyv.

30:9 Jura Yrnu fnj gung fur unq yrsg ornevat, fur gbbx Mvycnu ure
znvq, naq tnir ure Wnpbo gb jvsr.

30:10 Naq Mvycnu Yrnu'f znvq oner Wnpbo n fba.

30:11 Naq Yrnu fnvq, N gebbc pbzrgu: naq fur pnyyrq uvf anzr Tnq.

30:12 Naq Mvycnu Yrnu'f znvq oner Wnpbo n frpbaq fba.

30:13 Naq Yrnu fnvq, Unccl nz V, sbe gur qnhtugref jvyy pnyy zr
oyrffrq: naq fur pnyyrq uvf anzr Nfure.

30:14 Naq Erhora jrag va gur qnlf bs jurng uneirfg, naq sbhaq
znaqenxrf va gur svryq, naq oebhtug gurz hagb uvf zbgure Yrnu. Gura
Enpury fnvq gb Yrnu, Tvir zr, V cenl gurr, bs gul fba'f znaqenxrf.

30:15 Naq fur fnvq hagb ure, Vf vg n fznyy znggre gung gubh unfg gnxra
zl uhfonaq? naq jbhyqrfg gubh gnxr njnl zl fba'f znaqenxrf nyfb? Naq
Enpury fnvq, Gurersber ur funyy yvr jvgu gurr gb avtug sbe gul fba'f
znaqenxrf.

30:16 Naq Wnpbo pnzr bhg bs gur svryq va gur riravat, naq Yrnu jrag
bhg gb zrrg uvz, naq fnvq, Gubh zhfg pbzr va hagb zr; sbe fheryl V
unir uverq gurr jvgu zl fba'f znaqenxrf. Naq ur ynl jvgu ure gung
avtug.

30:17 Naq Tbq urnexrarq hagb Yrnu, naq fur pbaprvirq, naq oner Wnpbo
gur svsgu fba.

30:18 Naq Yrnu fnvq, Tbq ungu tvira zr zl uver, orpnhfr V unir tvira
zl znvqra gb zl uhfonaq: naq fur pnyyrq uvf anzr Vffnpune.

30:19 Naq Yrnu pbaprvirq ntnva, naq oner Wnpbo gur fvkgu fba.

30:20 Naq Yrnu fnvq, Tbq ungu raqhrq zr jvgu n tbbq qbjel; abj jvyy zl
uhfonaq qjryy jvgu zr, orpnhfr V unir obea uvz fvk fbaf: naq fur
pnyyrq uvf anzr Mrohyha.

30:21 Naq nsgrejneqf fur oner n qnhtugre, naq pnyyrq ure anzr Qvanu.

30:22 Naq Tbq erzrzorerq Enpury, naq Tbq urnexrarq gb ure, naq bcrarq
ure jbzo.

30:23 Naq fur pbaprvirq, naq oner n fba; naq fnvq, Tbq ungu gnxra njnl
zl ercebnpu: 30:24 Naq fur pnyyrq uvf anzr Wbfrcu; naq fnvq, Gur YBEQ
funyy nqq gb zr nabgure fba.

30:25 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Enpury unq obea Wbfrcu, gung Wnpbo
fnvq hagb Ynona, Fraq zr njnl, gung V znl tb hagb zvar bja cynpr, naq
gb zl pbhagel.

30:26 Tvir zr zl jvirf naq zl puvyqera, sbe jubz V unir freirq gurr,
naq yrg zr tb: sbe gubh xabjrfg zl freivpr juvpu V unir qbar gurr.

30:27 Naq Ynona fnvq hagb uvz, V cenl gurr, vs V unir sbhaq snibhe va
guvar rlrf, gneel: sbe V unir yrnearq ol rkcrevrapr gung gur YBEQ ungu
oyrffrq zr sbe gul fnxr.

30:28 Naq ur fnvq, Nccbvag zr gul jntrf, naq V jvyy tvir vg.

30:29 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Gubh xabjrfg ubj V unir freirq gurr, naq
ubj gul pnggyr jnf jvgu zr.

30:30 Sbe vg jnf yvggyr juvpu gubh unqfg orsber V pnzr, naq vg vf abj
vapernfrq hagb n zhygvghqr; naq gur YBEQ ungu oyrffrq gurr fvapr zl
pbzvat: naq abj jura funyy V cebivqr sbe zvar bja ubhfr nyfb?  30:31
Naq ur fnvq, Jung funyy V tvir gurr? Naq Wnpbo fnvq, Gubh funyg abg
tvir zr nal guvat: vs gubh jvyg qb guvf guvat sbe zr, V jvyy ntnva
srrq naq xrrc gul sybpx.

30:32 V jvyy cnff guebhtu nyy gul sybpx gb qnl, erzbivat sebz gurapr
nyy gur fcrpxyrq naq fcbggrq pnggyr, naq nyy gur oebja pnggyr nzbat
gur furrc, naq gur fcbggrq naq fcrpxyrq nzbat gur tbngf: naq bs fhpu
funyy or zl uver.

30:33 Fb funyy zl evtugrbhfarff nafjre sbe zr va gvzr gb pbzr, jura vg
funyy pbzr sbe zl uver orsber gul snpr: rirel bar gung vf abg fcrpxyrq
naq fcbggrq nzbat gur tbngf, naq oebja nzbat gur furrc, gung funyy or
pbhagrq fgbyra jvgu zr.

30:34 Naq Ynona fnvq, Orubyq, V jbhyq vg zvtug or nppbeqvat gb gul
jbeq.

30:35 Naq ur erzbirq gung qnl gur ur tbngf gung jrer evatfgenxrq naq
fcbggrq, naq nyy gur fur tbngf gung jrer fcrpxyrq naq fcbggrq, naq
rirel bar gung unq fbzr juvgr va vg, naq nyy gur oebja nzbat gur
furrc, naq tnir gurz vagb gur unaq bs uvf fbaf.

30:36 Naq ur frg guerr qnlf' wbhearl orgjvkg uvzfrys naq Wnpbo: naq
Wnpbo srq gur erfg bs Ynona'f sybpxf.

30:37 Naq Wnpbo gbbx uvz ebqf bs terra cbcyne, naq bs gur unmry naq
purfahg gerr; naq cvyyrq juvgr fgenxrf va gurz, naq znqr gur juvgr
nccrne juvpu jnf va gur ebqf.

30:38 Naq ur frg gur ebqf juvpu ur unq cvyyrq orsber gur sybpxf va gur
thggref va gur jngrevat gebhtuf jura gur sybpxf pnzr gb qevax, gung
gurl fubhyq pbaprvir jura gurl pnzr gb qevax.

30:39 Naq gur sybpxf pbaprvirq orsber gur ebqf, naq oebhtug sbegu
pnggyr evatfgenxrq, fcrpxyrq, naq fcbggrq.

30:40 Naq Wnpbo qvq frcnengr gur ynzof, naq frg gur snprf bs gur
sybpxf gbjneq gur evatfgenxrq, naq nyy gur oebja va gur sybpx bs
Ynona; naq ur chg uvf bja sybpxf ol gurzfryirf, naq chg gurz abg hagb
Ynona'f pnggyr.

30:41 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jurafbrire gur fgebatre pnggyr qvq
pbaprvir, gung Wnpbo ynvq gur ebqf orsber gur rlrf bs gur pnggyr va
gur thggref, gung gurl zvtug pbaprvir nzbat gur ebqf.

30:42 Ohg jura gur pnggyr jrer srroyr, ur chg gurz abg va: fb gur
srroyre jrer Ynona'f, naq gur fgebatre Wnpbo'f.

30:43 Naq gur zna vapernfrq rkprrqvatyl, naq unq zhpu pnggyr, naq
znvqfreinagf, naq zrafreinagf, naq pnzryf, naq nffrf.

31:1 Naq ur urneq gur jbeqf bs Ynona'f fbaf, fnlvat, Wnpbo ungu gnxra
njnl nyy gung jnf bhe sngure'f; naq bs gung juvpu jnf bhe sngure'f
ungu ur tbggra nyy guvf tybel.

31:2 Naq Wnpbo oruryq gur pbhagranapr bs Ynona, naq, orubyq, vg jnf
abg gbjneq uvz nf orsber.

31:3 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Wnpbo, Erghea hagb gur ynaq bs gul
snguref, naq gb gul xvaqerq; naq V jvyy or jvgu gurr.

31:4 Naq Wnpbo frag naq pnyyrq Enpury naq Yrnu gb gur svryq hagb uvf
sybpx, 31:5 Naq fnvq hagb gurz, V frr lbhe sngure'f pbhagranapr, gung
vg vf abg gbjneq zr nf orsber; ohg gur Tbq bs zl sngure ungu orra jvgu
zr.

31:6 Naq lr xabj gung jvgu nyy zl cbjre V unir freirq lbhe sngure.

31:7 Naq lbhe sngure ungu qrprvirq zr, naq punatrq zl jntrf gra gvzrf;
ohg Tbq fhssrerq uvz abg gb uheg zr.

31:8 Vs ur fnvq guhf, Gur fcrpxyrq funyy or gul jntrf; gura nyy gur
pnggyr oner fcrpxyrq: naq vs ur fnvq guhf, Gur evatfgenxrq funyy or
gul uver; gura oner nyy gur pnggyr evatfgenxrq.

31:9 Guhf Tbq ungu gnxra njnl gur pnggyr bs lbhe sngure, naq tvira
gurz gb zr.

31:10 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng gur gvzr gung gur pnggyr pbaprvirq, gung
V yvsgrq hc zvar rlrf, naq fnj va n qernz, naq, orubyq, gur enzf juvpu
yrncrq hcba gur pnggyr jrer evatfgenxrq, fcrpxyrq, naq tevfyrq.

31:11 Naq gur natry bs Tbq fcnxr hagb zr va n qernz, fnlvat, Wnpbo:
Naq V fnvq, Urer nz V.

31:12 Naq ur fnvq, Yvsg hc abj guvar rlrf, naq frr, nyy gur enzf juvpu
yrnc hcba gur pnggyr ner evatfgenxrq, fcrpxyrq, naq tevfyrq: sbe V
unir frra nyy gung Ynona qbrgu hagb gurr.

31:13 V nz gur Tbq bs Orgury, jurer gubh nabvagrqfg gur cvyyne, naq
jurer gubh ibjrqfg n ibj hagb zr: abj nevfr, trg gurr bhg sebz guvf
ynaq, naq erghea hagb gur ynaq bs gul xvaqerq.

31:14 Naq Enpury naq Yrnu nafjrerq naq fnvq hagb uvz, Vf gurer lrg nal
cbegvba be vaurevgnapr sbe hf va bhe sngure'f ubhfr?  31:15 Ner jr abg
pbhagrq bs uvz fgenatref? sbe ur ungu fbyq hf, naq ungu dhvgr qribherq
nyfb bhe zbarl.

31:16 Sbe nyy gur evpurf juvpu Tbq ungu gnxra sebz bhe sngure, gung vf
bhef, naq bhe puvyqera'f: abj gura, jungfbrire Tbq ungu fnvq hagb
gurr, qb.

31:17 Gura Wnpbo ebfr hc, naq frg uvf fbaf naq uvf jvirf hcba pnzryf;
31:18 Naq ur pneevrq njnl nyy uvf pnggyr, naq nyy uvf tbbqf juvpu ur
unq tbggra, gur pnggyr bs uvf trggvat, juvpu ur unq tbggra va
Cnqnanenz, sbe gb tb gb Vfnnp uvf sngure va gur ynaq bs Pnanna.

31:19 Naq Ynona jrag gb furne uvf furrc: naq Enpury unq fgbyra gur
vzntrf gung jrer ure sngure'f.

31:20 Naq Wnpbo fgbyr njnl hanjnerf gb Ynona gur Flevna, va gung ur
gbyq uvz abg gung ur syrq.

31:21 Fb ur syrq jvgu nyy gung ur unq; naq ur ebfr hc, naq cnffrq bire
gur evire, naq frg uvf snpr gbjneq gur zbhag Tvyrnq.

31:22 Naq vg jnf gbyq Ynona ba gur guveq qnl gung Wnpbo jnf syrq.

31:23 Naq ur gbbx uvf oerguera jvgu uvz, naq chefhrq nsgre uvz frira
qnlf' wbhearl; naq gurl biregbbx uvz va gur zbhag Tvyrnq.

31:24 Naq Tbq pnzr gb Ynona gur Flevna va n qernz ol avtug, naq fnvq
hagb uvz, Gnxr urrq gung gubh fcrnx abg gb Wnpbo rvgure tbbq be onq.

31:25 Gura Ynona biregbbx Wnpbo. Abj Wnpbo unq cvgpurq uvf grag va gur
zbhag: naq Ynona jvgu uvf oerguera cvgpurq va gur zbhag bs Tvyrnq.

31:26 Naq Ynona fnvq gb Wnpbo, Jung unfg gubh qbar, gung gubh unfg
fgbyra njnl hanjnerf gb zr, naq pneevrq njnl zl qnhtugref, nf pncgvirf
gnxra jvgu gur fjbeq?  31:27 Jurersber qvqfg gubh syrr njnl frpergyl,
naq fgrny njnl sebz zr; naq qvqfg abg gryy zr, gung V zvtug unir frag
gurr njnl jvgu zvegu, naq jvgu fbatf, jvgu gnoerg, naq jvgu unec?
31:28 Naq unfg abg fhssrerq zr gb xvff zl fbaf naq zl qnhtugref? gubh
unfg abj qbar sbbyvfuyl va fb qbvat.

31:29 Vg vf va gur cbjre bs zl unaq gb qb lbh uheg: ohg gur Tbq bs
lbhe sngure fcnxr hagb zr lrfgreavtug, fnlvat, Gnxr gubh urrq gung
gubh fcrnx abg gb Wnpbo rvgure tbbq be onq.

31:30 Naq abj, gubhtu gubh jbhyqrfg arrqf or tbar, orpnhfr gubh fber
ybatrqfg nsgre gul sngure'f ubhfr, lrg jurersber unfg gubh fgbyra zl
tbqf?  31:31 Naq Wnpbo nafjrerq naq fnvq gb Ynona, Orpnhfr V jnf
nsenvq: sbe V fnvq, Crenqiragher gubh jbhyqrfg gnxr ol sbepr gul
qnhtugref sebz zr.

31:32 Jvgu jubzfbrire gubh svaqrfg gul tbqf, yrg uvz abg yvir: orsber
bhe oerguera qvfprea gubh jung vf guvar jvgu zr, naq gnxr vg gb gurr.
Sbe Wnpbo xarj abg gung Enpury unq fgbyra gurz.

31:33 Naq Ynona jrag vagb Wnpbo'f grag, naq vagb Yrnu'f grag, naq vagb
gur gjb znvqfreinagf' gragf; ohg ur sbhaq gurz abg. Gura jrag ur bhg
bs Yrnu'f grag, naq ragrerq vagb Enpury'f grag.

31:34 Abj Enpury unq gnxra gur vzntrf, naq chg gurz va gur pnzry'f
sheavgher, naq fng hcba gurz. Naq Ynona frnepurq nyy gur grag, ohg
sbhaq gurz abg.

31:35 Naq fur fnvq gb ure sngure, Yrg vg abg qvfcyrnfr zl ybeq gung V
pnaabg evfr hc orsber gurr; sbe gur phfgbz bs jbzra vf hcba zr. Naq ur
frnepurq ohg sbhaq abg gur vzntrf.

31:36 Naq Wnpbo jnf jebgu, naq pubqr jvgu Ynona: naq Wnpbo nafjrerq
naq fnvq gb Ynona, Jung vf zl gerfcnff? jung vf zl fva, gung gubh unfg
fb ubgyl chefhrq nsgre zr?  31:37 Jurernf gubh unfg frnepurq nyy zl
fghss, jung unfg gubh sbhaq bs nyy gul ubhfrubyq fghss? frg vg urer
orsber zl oerguera naq gul oerguera, gung gurl znl whqtr orgjvkg hf
obgu.

31:38 Guvf gjragl lrnef unir V orra jvgu gurr; gul rjrf naq gul fur
tbngf unir abg pnfg gurve lbhat, naq gur enzf bs gul sybpx unir V abg
rngra.

31:39 Gung juvpu jnf gbea bs ornfgf V oebhtug abg hagb gurr; V oner
gur ybff bs vg; bs zl unaq qvqfg gubh erdhver vg, jurgure fgbyra ol
qnl, be fgbyra ol avtug.

31:40 Guhf V jnf; va gur qnl gur qebhtug pbafhzrq zr, naq gur sebfg ol
avtug; naq zl fyrrc qrcnegrq sebz zvar rlrf.

31:41 Guhf unir V orra gjragl lrnef va gul ubhfr; V freirq gurr
sbhegrra lrnef sbe gul gjb qnhtugref, naq fvk lrnef sbe gul pnggyr:
naq gubh unfg punatrq zl jntrf gra gvzrf.

31:42 Rkprcg gur Tbq bs zl sngure, gur Tbq bs Noenunz, naq gur srne bs
Vfnnp, unq orra jvgu zr, fheryl gubh unqfg frag zr njnl abj rzcgl. Tbq
ungu frra zvar nssyvpgvba naq gur ynobhe bs zl unaqf, naq erohxrq gurr
lrfgreavtug.

31:43 Naq Ynona nafjrerq naq fnvq hagb Wnpbo, Gurfr qnhtugref ner zl
qnhtugref, naq gurfr puvyqera ner zl puvyqera, naq gurfr pnggyr ner zl
pnggyr, naq nyy gung gubh frrfg vf zvar: naq jung pna V qb guvf qnl
hagb gurfr zl qnhtugref, be hagb gurve puvyqera juvpu gurl unir obea?
31:44 Abj gurersber pbzr gubh, yrg hf znxr n pbiranag, V naq gubh; naq
yrg vg or sbe n jvgarff orgjrra zr naq gurr.

31:45 Naq Wnpbo gbbx n fgbar, naq frg vg hc sbe n cvyyne.

31:46 Naq Wnpbo fnvq hagb uvf oerguera, Tngure fgbarf; naq gurl gbbx
fgbarf, naq znqr na urnc: naq gurl qvq rng gurer hcba gur urnc.

31:47 Naq Ynona pnyyrq vg Wrtnefnunqhgun: ohg Wnpbo pnyyrq vg Tnyrrq.

31:48 Naq Ynona fnvq, Guvf urnc vf n jvgarff orgjrra zr naq gurr guvf
qnl.

Gurersber jnf gur anzr bs vg pnyyrq Tnyrrq; 31:49 Naq Zvmcnu; sbe ur
fnvq, Gur YBEQ jngpu orgjrra zr naq gurr, jura jr ner nofrag bar sebz
nabgure.

31:50 Vs gubh funyg nssyvpg zl qnhtugref, be vs gubh funyg gnxr bgure
jvirf orfvqr zl qnhtugref, ab zna vf jvgu hf; frr, Tbq vf jvgarff
orgjvkg zr naq gurr.

31:51 Naq Ynona fnvq gb Wnpbo, Orubyq guvf urnc, naq orubyq guvf
cvyyne, juvpu V unir pnfg orgjvkg zr naq gurr: 31:52 Guvf urnc or
jvgarff, naq guvf cvyyne or jvgarff, gung V jvyy abg cnff bire guvf
urnc gb gurr, naq gung gubh funyg abg cnff bire guvf urnc naq guvf
cvyyne hagb zr, sbe unez.

31:53 Gur Tbq bs Noenunz, naq gur Tbq bs Anube, gur Tbq bs gurve
sngure, whqtr orgjvkg hf. Naq Wnpbo fjner ol gur srne bs uvf sngure
Vfnnp.

31:54 Gura Wnpbo bssrerq fnpevsvpr hcba gur zbhag, naq pnyyrq uvf
oerguera gb rng oernq: naq gurl qvq rng oernq, naq gneevrq nyy avtug
va gur zbhag.

31:55 Naq rneyl va gur zbeavat Ynona ebfr hc, naq xvffrq uvf fbaf naq
uvf qnhtugref, naq oyrffrq gurz: naq Ynona qrcnegrq, naq erghearq hagb
uvf cynpr.

32:1 Naq Wnpbo jrag ba uvf jnl, naq gur natryf bs Tbq zrg uvz.

32:2 Naq jura Wnpbo fnj gurz, ur fnvq, Guvf vf Tbq'f ubfg: naq ur
pnyyrq gur anzr bs gung cynpr Znunanvz.

32:3 Naq Wnpbo frag zrffratref orsber uvz gb Rfnh uvf oebgure hagb gur
ynaq bs Frve, gur pbhagel bs Rqbz.

32:4 Naq ur pbzznaqrq gurz, fnlvat, Guhf funyy lr fcrnx hagb zl ybeq
Rfnh; Gul freinag Wnpbo fnvgu guhf, V unir fbwbhearq jvgu Ynona, naq
fgnlrq gurer hagvy abj: 32:5 Naq V unir bkra, naq nffrf, sybpxf, naq
zrafreinagf, naq jbzrafreinagf: naq V unir frag gb gryy zl ybeq, gung
V znl svaq tenpr va gul fvtug.

32:6 Naq gur zrffratref erghearq gb Wnpbo, fnlvat, Jr pnzr gb gul
oebgure Rfnh, naq nyfb ur pbzrgu gb zrrg gurr, naq sbhe uhaqerq zra
jvgu uvz.

32:7 Gura Wnpbo jnf terngyl nsenvq naq qvfgerffrq: naq ur qvivqrq gur
crbcyr gung jnf jvgu uvz, naq gur sybpxf, naq ureqf, naq gur pnzryf,
vagb gjb onaqf; 32:8 Naq fnvq, Vs Rfnh pbzr gb gur bar pbzcnal, naq
fzvgr vg, gura gur bgure pbzcnal juvpu vf yrsg funyy rfpncr.

32:9 Naq Wnpbo fnvq, B Tbq bs zl sngure Noenunz, naq Tbq bs zl sngure
Vfnnp, gur YBEQ juvpu fnvqfg hagb zr, Erghea hagb gul pbhagel, naq gb
gul xvaqerq, naq V jvyy qrny jryy jvgu gurr: 32:10 V nz abg jbegul bs
gur yrnfg bs nyy gur zrepvrf, naq bs nyy gur gehgu, juvpu gubh unfg
furjrq hagb gul freinag; sbe jvgu zl fgnss V cnffrq bire guvf Wbeqna;
naq abj V nz orpbzr gjb onaqf.

32:11 Qryvire zr, V cenl gurr, sebz gur unaq bs zl oebgure, sebz gur
unaq bs Rfnh: sbe V srne uvz, yrfg ur jvyy pbzr naq fzvgr zr, naq gur
zbgure jvgu gur puvyqera.

32:12 Naq gubh fnvqfg, V jvyy fheryl qb gurr tbbq, naq znxr gul frrq
nf gur fnaq bs gur frn, juvpu pnaabg or ahzorerq sbe zhygvghqr.

32:13 Naq ur ybqtrq gurer gung fnzr avtug; naq gbbx bs gung juvpu pnzr
gb uvf unaq n cerfrag sbe Rfnh uvf oebgure; 32:14 Gjb uhaqerq fur
tbngf, naq gjragl ur tbngf, gjb uhaqerq rjrf, naq gjragl enzf, 32:15
Guvegl zvypu pnzryf jvgu gurve pbygf, sbegl xvar, naq gra ohyyf,
gjragl fur nffrf, naq gra sbnyf.

32:16 Naq ur qryvirerq gurz vagb gur unaq bs uvf freinagf, rirel qebir
ol gurzfryirf; naq fnvq hagb uvf freinagf, Cnff bire orsber zr, naq
chg n fcnpr orgjvkg qebir naq qebir.

32:17 Naq ur pbzznaqrq gur sberzbfg, fnlvat, Jura Rfnh zl oebgure
zrrgrgu gurr, naq nfxrgu gurr, fnlvat, Jubfr neg gubh? naq juvgure
tbrfg gubh? naq jubfr ner gurfr orsber gurr?  32:18 Gura gubh funyg
fnl, Gurl or gul freinag Wnpbo'f; vg vf n cerfrag frag hagb zl ybeq
Rfnh: naq, orubyq, nyfb ur vf oruvaq hf.

32:19 Naq fb pbzznaqrq ur gur frpbaq, naq gur guveq, naq nyy gung
sbyybjrq gur qebirf, fnlvat, Ba guvf znaare funyy lr fcrnx hagb Rfnh,
jura lr svaq uvz.

32:20 Naq fnl lr zberbire, Orubyq, gul freinag Wnpbo vf oruvaq hf. Sbe
ur fnvq, V jvyy nccrnfr uvz jvgu gur cerfrag gung tbrgu orsber zr, naq
nsgrejneq V jvyy frr uvf snpr; crenqiragher ur jvyy npprcg bs zr.

32:21 Fb jrag gur cerfrag bire orsber uvz: naq uvzfrys ybqtrq gung
avtug va gur pbzcnal.

32:22 Naq ur ebfr hc gung avtug, naq gbbx uvf gjb jvirf, naq uvf gjb
jbzrafreinagf, naq uvf ryrira fbaf, naq cnffrq bire gur sbeq Wnoobx.

32:23 Naq ur gbbx gurz, naq frag gurz bire gur oebbx, naq frag bire
gung ur unq.

32:24 Naq Wnpbo jnf yrsg nybar; naq gurer jerfgyrq n zna jvgu uvz
hagvy gur oernxvat bs gur qnl.

32:25 Naq jura ur fnj gung ur cerinvyrq abg ntnvafg uvz, ur gbhpurq
gur ubyybj bs uvf guvtu; naq gur ubyybj bs Wnpbo'f guvtu jnf bhg bs
wbvag, nf ur jerfgyrq jvgu uvz.

32:26 Naq ur fnvq, Yrg zr tb, sbe gur qnl oernxrgu. Naq ur fnvq, V
jvyy abg yrg gurr tb, rkprcg gubh oyrff zr.

32:27 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Jung vf gul anzr? Naq ur fnvq, Wnpbo.

32:28 Naq ur fnvq, Gul anzr funyy or pnyyrq ab zber Wnpbo, ohg Vfenry:
sbe nf n cevapr unfg gubh cbjre jvgu Tbq naq jvgu zra, naq unfg
cerinvyrq.

32:29 Naq Wnpbo nfxrq uvz, naq fnvq, Gryy zr, V cenl gurr, gul anzr.
Naq ur fnvq, Jurersber vf vg gung gubh qbfg nfx nsgre zl anzr? Naq ur
oyrffrq uvz gurer.

32:30 Naq Wnpbo pnyyrq gur anzr bs gur cynpr Cravry: sbe V unir frra
Tbq snpr gb snpr, naq zl yvsr vf cerfreirq.

32:31 Naq nf ur cnffrq bire Crahry gur fha ebfr hcba uvz, naq ur
unygrq hcba uvf guvtu.

32:32 Gurersber gur puvyqera bs Vfenry rng abg bs gur fvarj juvpu
fuenax, juvpu vf hcba gur ubyybj bs gur guvtu, hagb guvf qnl: orpnhfr
ur gbhpurq gur ubyybj bs Wnpbo'f guvtu va gur fvarj gung fuenax.

33:1 Naq Wnpbo yvsgrq hc uvf rlrf, naq ybbxrq, naq, orubyq, Rfnh pnzr,
naq jvgu uvz sbhe uhaqerq zra. Naq ur qvivqrq gur puvyqera hagb Yrnu,
naq hagb Enpury, naq hagb gur gjb unaqznvqf.

33:2 Naq ur chg gur unaqznvqf naq gurve puvyqera sberzbfg, naq Yrnu
naq ure puvyqera nsgre, naq Enpury naq Wbfrcu uvaqrezbfg.

33:3 Naq ur cnffrq bire orsber gurz, naq objrq uvzfrys gb gur tebhaq
frira gvzrf, hagvy ur pnzr arne gb uvf oebgure.

33:4 Naq Rfnh ena gb zrrg uvz, naq rzoenprq uvz, naq sryy ba uvf arpx,
naq xvffrq uvz: naq gurl jrcg.

33:5 Naq ur yvsgrq hc uvf rlrf, naq fnj gur jbzra naq gur puvyqera;
naq fnvq, Jub ner gubfr jvgu gurr? Naq ur fnvq, Gur puvyqera juvpu Tbq
ungu tenpvbhfyl tvira gul freinag.

33:6 Gura gur unaqznvqraf pnzr arne, gurl naq gurve puvyqera, naq gurl
objrq gurzfryirf.

33:7 Naq Yrnu nyfb jvgu ure puvyqera pnzr arne, naq objrq gurzfryirf:
naq nsgre pnzr Wbfrcu arne naq Enpury, naq gurl objrq gurzfryirf.

33:8 Naq ur fnvq, Jung zrnarfg gubh ol nyy guvf qebir juvpu V zrg? Naq
ur fnvq, Gurfr ner gb svaq tenpr va gur fvtug bs zl ybeq.

33:9 Naq Rfnh fnvq, V unir rabhtu, zl oebgure; xrrc gung gubh unfg
hagb gulfrys.

33:10 Naq Wnpbo fnvq, Anl, V cenl gurr, vs abj V unir sbhaq tenpr va
gul fvtug, gura erprvir zl cerfrag ng zl unaq: sbe gurersber V unir
frra gul snpr, nf gubhtu V unq frra gur snpr bs Tbq, naq gubh jnfg
cyrnfrq jvgu zr.

33:11 Gnxr, V cenl gurr, zl oyrffvat gung vf oebhtug gb gurr; orpnhfr
Tbq ungu qrnyg tenpvbhfyl jvgu zr, naq orpnhfr V unir rabhtu. Naq ur
hetrq uvz, naq ur gbbx vg.

33:12 Naq ur fnvq, Yrg hf gnxr bhe wbhearl, naq yrg hf tb, naq V jvyy
tb orsber gurr.

33:13 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Zl ybeq xabjrgu gung gur puvyqera ner
graqre, naq gur sybpxf naq ureqf jvgu lbhat ner jvgu zr: naq vs zra
fubhyq bireqevir gurz bar qnl, nyy gur sybpx jvyy qvr.

33:14 Yrg zl ybeq, V cenl gurr, cnff bire orsber uvf freinag: naq V
jvyy yrnq ba fbsgyl, nppbeqvat nf gur pnggyr gung tbrgu orsber zr naq
gur puvyqera or noyr gb raqher, hagvy V pbzr hagb zl ybeq hagb Frve.

33:15 Naq Rfnh fnvq, Yrg zr abj yrnir jvgu gurr fbzr bs gur sbyx gung
ner jvgu zr. Naq ur fnvq, Jung arrqrgu vg? yrg zr svaq tenpr va gur
fvtug bs zl ybeq.

33:16 Fb Rfnh erghearq gung qnl ba uvf jnl hagb Frve.

33:17 Naq Wnpbo wbhearlrq gb Fhppbgu, naq ohvyg uvz na ubhfr, naq znqr
obbguf sbe uvf pnggyr: gurersber gur anzr bs gur cynpr vf pnyyrq
Fhppbgu.

33:18 Naq Wnpbo pnzr gb Funyrz, n pvgl bs Furpurz, juvpu vf va gur
ynaq bs Pnanna, jura ur pnzr sebz Cnqnanenz; naq cvgpurq uvf grag
orsber gur pvgl.

33:19 Naq ur obhtug n cnepry bs n svryq, jurer ur unq fcernq uvf grag,
ng gur unaq bs gur puvyqera bs Unzbe, Furpurz'f sngure, sbe na uhaqerq
cvrprf bs zbarl.

33:20 Naq ur rerpgrq gurer na nygne, naq pnyyrq vg RyryburVfenry.

34:1 Naq Qvanu gur qnhtugre bs Yrnu, juvpu fur oner hagb Wnpbo, jrag
bhg gb frr gur qnhtugref bs gur ynaq.

34:2 Naq jura Furpurz gur fba bs Unzbe gur Uvivgr, cevapr bs gur
pbhagel, fnj ure, ur gbbx ure, naq ynl jvgu ure, naq qrsvyrq ure.

34:3 Naq uvf fbhy pynir hagb Qvanu gur qnhtugre bs Wnpbo, naq ur ybirq
gur qnzfry, naq fcnxr xvaqyl hagb gur qnzfry.

34:4 Naq Furpurz fcnxr hagb uvf sngure Unzbe, fnlvat, Trg zr guvf
qnzfry gb jvsr.

34:5 Naq Wnpbo urneq gung ur unq qrsvyrq Qvanu uvf qnhtugre: abj uvf
fbaf jrer jvgu uvf pnggyr va gur svryq: naq Wnpbo uryq uvf crnpr hagvy
gurl jrer pbzr.

34:6 Naq Unzbe gur sngure bs Furpurz jrag bhg hagb Wnpbo gb pbzzhar
jvgu uvz.

34:7 Naq gur fbaf bs Wnpbo pnzr bhg bs gur svryq jura gurl urneq vg:
naq gur zra jrer tevrirq, naq gurl jrer irel jebgu, orpnhfr ur unq
jebhtug sbyyl va Vfenry va ylvat jvgu Wnpbo'f qnhtugre: juvpu guvat
bhtug abg gb or qbar.

34:8 Naq Unzbe pbzzharq jvgu gurz, fnlvat, Gur fbhy bs zl fba Furpurz
ybatrgu sbe lbhe qnhtugre: V cenl lbh tvir ure uvz gb jvsr.

34:9 Naq znxr lr zneevntrf jvgu hf, naq tvir lbhe qnhtugref hagb hf,
naq gnxr bhe qnhtugref hagb lbh.

34:10 Naq lr funyy qjryy jvgu hf: naq gur ynaq funyy or orsber lbh;
qjryy naq genqr lr gurerva, naq trg lbh cbffrffvbaf gurerva.

34:11 Naq Furpurz fnvq hagb ure sngure naq hagb ure oerguera, Yrg zr
svaq tenpr va lbhe rlrf, naq jung lr funyy fnl hagb zr V jvyy tvir.

34:12 Nfx zr arire fb zhpu qbjel naq tvsg, naq V jvyy tvir nppbeqvat
nf lr funyy fnl hagb zr: ohg tvir zr gur qnzfry gb jvsr.

34:13 Naq gur fbaf bs Wnpbo nafjrerq Furpurz naq Unzbe uvf sngure
qrprvgshyyl, naq fnvq, orpnhfr ur unq qrsvyrq Qvanu gurve fvfgre:
34:14 Naq gurl fnvq hagb gurz, Jr pnaabg qb guvf guvat, gb tvir bhe
fvfgre gb bar gung vf hapvephzpvfrq; sbe gung jrer n ercebnpu hagb hf:
34:15 Ohg va guvf jvyy jr pbafrag hagb lbh: Vs lr jvyy or nf jr or,
gung rirel znyr bs lbh or pvephzpvfrq; 34:16 Gura jvyy jr tvir bhe
qnhtugref hagb lbh, naq jr jvyy gnxr lbhe qnhtugref gb hf, naq jr jvyy
qjryy jvgu lbh, naq jr jvyy orpbzr bar crbcyr.

34:17 Ohg vs lr jvyy abg urnexra hagb hf, gb or pvephzpvfrq; gura jvyy
jr gnxr bhe qnhtugre, naq jr jvyy or tbar.

34:18 Naq gurve jbeqf cyrnfrq Unzbe, naq Furpurz Unzbe'f fba.

34:19 Naq gur lbhat zna qrsreerq abg gb qb gur guvat, orpnhfr ur unq
qryvtug va Wnpbo'f qnhtugre: naq ur jnf zber ubabhenoyr guna nyy gur
ubhfr bs uvf sngure.

34:20 Naq Unzbe naq Furpurz uvf fba pnzr hagb gur tngr bs gurve pvgl,
naq pbzzharq jvgu gur zra bs gurve pvgl, fnlvat, 34:21 Gurfr zra ner
crnprnoyr jvgu hf; gurersber yrg gurz qjryy va gur ynaq, naq genqr
gurerva; sbe gur ynaq, orubyq, vg vf ynetr rabhtu sbe gurz; yrg hf
gnxr gurve qnhtugref gb hf sbe jvirf, naq yrg hf tvir gurz bhe
qnhtugref.

34:22 Bayl urerva jvyy gur zra pbafrag hagb hf sbe gb qjryy jvgu hf,
gb or bar crbcyr, vs rirel znyr nzbat hf or pvephzpvfrq, nf gurl ner
pvephzpvfrq.

34:23 Funyy abg gurve pnggyr naq gurve fhofgnapr naq rirel ornfg bs
gurve'f or bhe'f? bayl yrg hf pbafrag hagb gurz, naq gurl jvyy qjryy
jvgu hf.

34:24 Naq hagb Unzbe naq hagb Furpurz uvf fba urnexrarq nyy gung jrag
bhg bs gur tngr bs uvf pvgl; naq rirel znyr jnf pvephzpvfrq, nyy gung
jrag bhg bs gur tngr bs uvf pvgl.

34:25 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ba gur guveq qnl, jura gurl jrer fber, gung
gjb bs gur fbaf bs Wnpbo, Fvzrba naq Yriv, Qvanu'f oerguera, gbbx rnpu
zna uvf fjbeq, naq pnzr hcba gur pvgl obyqyl, naq fyrj nyy gur znyrf.

34:26 Naq gurl fyrj Unzbe naq Furpurz uvf fba jvgu gur rqtr bs gur
fjbeq, naq gbbx Qvanu bhg bs Furpurz'f ubhfr, naq jrag bhg.

34:27 Gur fbaf bs Wnpbo pnzr hcba gur fynva, naq fcbvyrq gur pvgl,
orpnhfr gurl unq qrsvyrq gurve fvfgre.

34:28 Gurl gbbx gurve furrc, naq gurve bkra, naq gurve nffrf, naq gung
juvpu jnf va gur pvgl, naq gung juvpu jnf va gur svryq, 34:29 Naq nyy
gurve jrnygu, naq nyy gurve yvggyr barf, naq gurve jvirf gbbx gurl
pncgvir, naq fcbvyrq rira nyy gung jnf va gur ubhfr.

34:30 Naq Wnpbo fnvq gb Fvzrba naq Yriv, Lr unir gebhoyrq zr gb znxr
zr gb fgvax nzbat gur vaunovgnagf bs gur ynaq, nzbat gur Pnannavgrf
naq gur Crevmmvgrf: naq V orvat srj va ahzore, gurl funyy tngure
gurzfryirf gbtrgure ntnvafg zr, naq fynl zr; naq V funyy or qrfgeblrq,
V naq zl ubhfr.

34:31 Naq gurl fnvq, Fubhyq ur qrny jvgu bhe fvfgre nf jvgu na uneybg?
35:1 Naq Tbq fnvq hagb Wnpbo, Nevfr, tb hc gb Orgury, naq qjryy gurer:
naq znxr gurer na nygne hagb Tbq, gung nccrnerq hagb gurr jura gubh
syrqqrfg sebz gur snpr bs Rfnh gul oebgure.

35:2 Gura Wnpbo fnvq hagb uvf ubhfrubyq, naq gb nyy gung jrer jvgu
uvz, Chg njnl gur fgenatr tbqf gung ner nzbat lbh, naq or pyrna, naq
punatr lbhe tnezragf: 35:3 Naq yrg hf nevfr, naq tb hc gb Orgury; naq
V jvyy znxr gurer na nygne hagb Tbq, jub nafjrerq zr va gur qnl bs zl
qvfgerff, naq jnf jvgu zr va gur jnl juvpu V jrag.

35:4 Naq gurl tnir hagb Wnpbo nyy gur fgenatr tbqf juvpu jrer va gurve
unaq, naq nyy gurve rneevatf juvpu jrer va gurve rnef; naq Wnpbo uvq
gurz haqre gur bnx juvpu jnf ol Furpurz.

35:5 Naq gurl wbhearlrq: naq gur greebe bs Tbq jnf hcba gur pvgvrf
gung jrer ebhaq nobhg gurz, naq gurl qvq abg chefhr nsgre gur fbaf bs
Wnpbo.

35:6 Fb Wnpbo pnzr gb Yhm, juvpu vf va gur ynaq bs Pnanna, gung vf,
Orgury, ur naq nyy gur crbcyr gung jrer jvgu uvz.

35:7 Naq ur ohvyg gurer na nygne, naq pnyyrq gur cynpr Ryorgury:
orpnhfr gurer Tbq nccrnerq hagb uvz, jura ur syrq sebz gur snpr bs uvf
oebgure.

35:8 Ohg Qrobenu Erorxnu'f ahefr qvrq, naq fur jnf ohevrq orarngu
Orgury haqre na bnx: naq gur anzr bs vg jnf pnyyrq Nyybaonpuhgu.

35:9 Naq Tbq nccrnerq hagb Wnpbo ntnva, jura ur pnzr bhg bs Cnqnanenz,
naq oyrffrq uvz.

35:10 Naq Tbq fnvq hagb uvz, Gul anzr vf Wnpbo: gul anzr funyy abg or
pnyyrq nal zber Wnpbo, ohg Vfenry funyy or gul anzr: naq ur pnyyrq uvf
anzr Vfenry.

35:11 Naq Tbq fnvq hagb uvz, V nz Tbq Nyzvtugl: or sehvgshy naq
zhygvcyl; n angvba naq n pbzcnal bs angvbaf funyy or bs gurr, naq
xvatf funyy pbzr bhg bs gul ybvaf; 35:12 Naq gur ynaq juvpu V tnir
Noenunz naq Vfnnp, gb gurr V jvyy tvir vg, naq gb gul frrq nsgre gurr
jvyy V tvir gur ynaq.

35:13 Naq Tbq jrag hc sebz uvz va gur cynpr jurer ur gnyxrq jvgu uvz.

35:14 Naq Wnpbo frg hc n cvyyne va gur cynpr jurer ur gnyxrq jvgu uvz,
rira n cvyyne bs fgbar: naq ur cbherq n qevax bssrevat gurerba, naq ur
cbherq bvy gurerba.

35:15 Naq Wnpbo pnyyrq gur anzr bs gur cynpr jurer Tbq fcnxr jvgu uvz,
Orgury.

35:16 Naq gurl wbhearlrq sebz Orgury; naq gurer jnf ohg n yvggyr jnl
gb pbzr gb Rcuengu: naq Enpury geninvyrq, naq fur unq uneq ynobhe.

35:17 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura fur jnf va uneq ynobhe, gung gur
zvqjvsr fnvq hagb ure, Srne abg; gubh funyg unir guvf fba nyfb.

35:18 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf ure fbhy jnf va qrcnegvat, (sbe fur
qvrq) gung fur pnyyrq uvf anzr Orabav: ohg uvf sngure pnyyrq uvz
Orawnzva.

35:19 Naq Enpury qvrq, naq jnf ohevrq va gur jnl gb Rcuengu, juvpu vf
Orguyrurz.

35:20 Naq Wnpbo frg n cvyyne hcba ure tenir: gung vf gur cvyyne bs
Enpury'f tenir hagb guvf qnl.

35:21 Naq Vfenry wbhearlrq, naq fcernq uvf grag orlbaq gur gbjre bs
Rqne.

35:22 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Vfenry qjryg va gung ynaq, gung Erhora
jrag naq ynl jvgu Ovyunu uvf sngure'f pbaphovar: naq Vfenry urneq vg.
Abj gur fbaf bs Wnpbo jrer gjryir: 35:23 Gur fbaf bs Yrnu; Erhora,
Wnpbo'f svefgobea, naq Fvzrba, naq Yriv, naq Whqnu, naq Vffnpune, naq
Mrohyha: 35:24 Gur fbaf bs Enpury; Wbfrcu, naq Orawnzva: 35:25 Naq gur
fbaf bs Ovyunu, Enpury'f unaqznvq; Qna, naq Ancugnyv: 35:26 Naq gur
fbaf bs Mvycnu, Yrnu'f unaqznvq: Tnq, naq Nfure: gurfr ner gur fbaf bs
Wnpbo, juvpu jrer obea gb uvz va Cnqnanenz.

35:27 Naq Wnpbo pnzr hagb Vfnnp uvf sngure hagb Znzer, hagb gur pvgl
bs Neonu, juvpu vf Uroeba, jurer Noenunz naq Vfnnp fbwbhearq.

35:28 Naq gur qnlf bs Vfnnp jrer na uhaqerq naq sbhefpber lrnef.

35:29 Naq Vfnnp tnir hc gur tubfg, naq qvrq, naq jnf tngurerq hagb uvf
crbcyr, orvat byq naq shyy bs qnlf: naq uvf fbaf Rfnh naq Wnpbo ohevrq
uvz.

36:1 Abj gurfr ner gur trarengvbaf bs Rfnh, jub vf Rqbz.

36:2 Rfnh gbbx uvf jvirf bs gur qnhtugref bs Pnanna; Nqnu gur qnhtugre
bs Ryba gur Uvggvgr, naq Nubyvonznu gur qnhtugre bs Nanu gur qnhtugre
bs Mvorba gur Uvivgr; 36:3 Naq Onfurzngu Vfuznry'f qnhtugre, fvfgre bs
Aronwbgu.

36:4 Naq Nqnu oner gb Rfnh Ryvcunm; naq Onfurzngu oner Erhry; 36:5 Naq
Nubyvonznu oner Wrhfu, naq Wnnynz, naq Xbenu: gurfr ner gur fbaf bs
Rfnh, juvpu jrer obea hagb uvz va gur ynaq bs Pnanna.

36:6 Naq Rfnh gbbx uvf jvirf, naq uvf fbaf, naq uvf qnhtugref, naq nyy
gur crefbaf bs uvf ubhfr, naq uvf pnggyr, naq nyy uvf ornfgf, naq nyy
uvf fhofgnapr, juvpu ur unq tbg va gur ynaq bs Pnanna; naq jrag vagb
gur pbhagel sebz gur snpr bs uvf oebgure Wnpbo.

36:7 Sbe gurve evpurf jrer zber guna gung gurl zvtug qjryy gbtrgure;
naq gur ynaq jurerva gurl jrer fgenatref pbhyq abg orne gurz orpnhfr
bs gurve pnggyr.

36:8 Guhf qjryg Rfnh va zbhag Frve: Rfnh vf Rqbz.

36:9 Naq gurfr ner gur trarengvbaf bs Rfnh gur sngure bs gur Rqbzvgrf
va zbhag Frve: 36:10 Gurfr ner gur anzrf bs Rfnh'f fbaf; Ryvcunm gur
fba bs Nqnu gur jvsr bs Rfnh, Erhry gur fba bs Onfurzngu gur jvsr bs
Rfnh.

36:11 Naq gur fbaf bs Ryvcunm jrer Grzna, Bzne, Mrcub, naq Tngnz, naq
Xranm.

36:12 Naq Gvzan jnf pbaphovar gb Ryvcunm Rfnh'f fba; naq fur oner gb
Ryvcunm Nznyrx: gurfr jrer gur fbaf bs Nqnu Rfnh'f jvsr.

36:13 Naq gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Erhry; Anungu, naq Mrenu, Funzznu, naq
Zvmmnu: gurfr jrer gur fbaf bs Onfurzngu Rfnh'f jvsr.

36:14 Naq gurfr jrer gur fbaf bs Nubyvonznu, gur qnhtugre bs Nanu gur
qnhtugre bs Mvorba, Rfnh'f jvsr: naq fur oner gb Rfnh Wrhfu, naq
Wnnynz, naq Xbenu.

36:15 Gurfr jrer qhxrf bs gur fbaf bs Rfnh: gur fbaf bs Ryvcunm gur
svefgobea fba bs Rfnh; qhxr Grzna, qhxr Bzne, qhxr Mrcub, qhxr Xranm,
36:16 Qhxr Xbenu, qhxr Tngnz, naq qhxr Nznyrx: gurfr ner gur qhxrf
gung pnzr bs Ryvcunm va gur ynaq bs Rqbz; gurfr jrer gur fbaf bs Nqnu.

36:17 Naq gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Erhry Rfnh'f fba; qhxr Anungu, qhxr
Mrenu, qhxr Funzznu, qhxr Zvmmnu: gurfr ner gur qhxrf gung pnzr bs
Erhry va gur ynaq bs Rqbz; gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Onfurzngu Rfnh'f
jvsr.

36:18 Naq gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Nubyvonznu Rfnh'f jvsr; qhxr Wrhfu,
qhxr Wnnynz, qhxr Xbenu: gurfr jrer gur qhxrf gung pnzr bs Nubyvonznu
gur qnhtugre bs Nanu, Rfnh'f jvsr.

36:19 Gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Rfnh, jub vf Rqbz, naq gurfr ner gurve
qhxrf.

36:20 Gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Frve gur Ubevgr, jub vaunovgrq gur ynaq;
Ybgna, naq Fubony, naq Mvorba, naq Nanu, 36:21 Naq Qvfuba, naq Rmre,
naq Qvfuna: gurfr ner gur qhxrf bs gur Ubevgrf, gur puvyqera bs Frve
va gur ynaq bs Rqbz.

36:22 Naq gur puvyqera bs Ybgna jrer Ubev naq Urznz; naq Ybgna'f
fvfgre jnf Gvzan.

36:23 Naq gur puvyqera bs Fubony jrer gurfr; Nyina, naq Znanungu, naq
Rony, Furcub, naq Banz.

36:24 Naq gurfr ner gur puvyqera bs Mvorba; obgu Nwnu, naq Nanu: guvf
jnf gung Nanu gung sbhaq gur zhyrf va gur jvyqrearff, nf ur srq gur
nffrf bs Mvorba uvf sngure.

36:25 Naq gur puvyqera bs Nanu jrer gurfr; Qvfuba, naq Nubyvonznu gur
qnhtugre bs Nanu.

36:26 Naq gurfr ner gur puvyqera bs Qvfuba; Urzqna, naq Rfuona, naq
Vguena, naq Purena.

36:27 Gur puvyqera bs Rmre ner gurfr; Ovyuna, naq Mnnina, naq Nxna.

36:28 Gur puvyqera bs Qvfuna ner gurfr; Hm, naq Nena.

36:29 Gurfr ner gur qhxrf gung pnzr bs gur Ubevgrf; qhxr Ybgna, qhxr
Fubony, qhxr Mvorba, qhxr Nanu, 36:30 Qhxr Qvfuba, qhxr Rmre, qhxr
Qvfuna: gurfr ner gur qhxrf gung pnzr bs Ubev, nzbat gurve qhxrf va
gur ynaq bs Frve.

36:31 Naq gurfr ner gur xvatf gung ervtarq va gur ynaq bs Rqbz, orsber
gurer ervtarq nal xvat bire gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

36:32 Naq Oryn gur fba bs Orbe ervtarq va Rqbz: naq gur anzr bs uvf
pvgl jnf Qvaunonu.

36:33 Naq Oryn qvrq, naq Wbono gur fba bs Mrenu bs Obmenu ervtarq va
uvf fgrnq.

36:34 Naq Wbono qvrq, naq Uhfunz bs gur ynaq bs Grznav ervtarq va uvf
fgrnq.

36:35 Naq Uhfunz qvrq, naq Unqnq gur fba bs Orqnq, jub fzbgr Zvqvna va
gur svryq bs Zbno, ervtarq va uvf fgrnq: naq gur anzr bs uvf pvgl jnf
Nivgu.

36:36 Naq Unqnq qvrq, naq Fnzynu bs Znferxnu ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

36:37 Naq Fnzynu qvrq, naq Fnhy bs Erubobgu ol gur evire ervtarq va
uvf fgrnq.

36:38 Naq Fnhy qvrq, naq Onnyunana gur fba bs Npuobe ervtarq va uvf
fgrnq.

36:39 Naq Onnyunana gur fba bs Npuobe qvrq, naq Unqne ervtarq va uvf
fgrnq: naq gur anzr bs uvf pvgl jnf Cnh; naq uvf jvsr'f anzr jnf
Zrurgnory, gur qnhtugre bs Zngerq, gur qnhtugre bs Zrmnuno.

36:40 Naq gurfr ner gur anzrf bs gur qhxrf gung pnzr bs Rfnh,
nppbeqvat gb gurve snzvyvrf, nsgre gurve cynprf, ol gurve anzrf; qhxr
Gvzanu, qhxr Nyinu, qhxr Wrgurgu, 36:41 Qhxr Nubyvonznu, qhxr Rynu,
qhxr Cvaba, 36:42 Qhxr Xranm, qhxr Grzna, qhxr Zvomne, 36:43 Qhxr
Zntqvry, qhxr Venz: gurfr or gur qhxrf bs Rqbz, nppbeqvat gb gurve
unovgngvbaf va gur ynaq bs gurve cbffrffvba: ur vf Rfnh gur sngure bs
gur Rqbzvgrf.

37:1 Naq Wnpbo qjryg va gur ynaq jurerva uvf sngure jnf n fgenatre, va
gur ynaq bs Pnanna.

37:2 Gurfr ner gur trarengvbaf bs Wnpbo. Wbfrcu, orvat friragrra lrnef
byq, jnf srrqvat gur sybpx jvgu uvf oerguera; naq gur ynq jnf jvgu gur
fbaf bs Ovyunu, naq jvgu gur fbaf bs Mvycnu, uvf sngure'f jvirf: naq
Wbfrcu oebhtug hagb uvf sngure gurve rivy ercbeg.

37:3 Abj Vfenry ybirq Wbfrcu zber guna nyy uvf puvyqera, orpnhfr ur
jnf gur fba bs uvf byq ntr: naq ur znqr uvz n pbng bs znal pbybhef.

37:4 Naq jura uvf oerguera fnj gung gurve sngure ybirq uvz zber guna
nyy uvf oerguera, gurl ungrq uvz, naq pbhyq abg fcrnx crnprnoyl hagb
uvz.

37:5 Naq Wbfrcu qernzrq n qernz, naq ur gbyq vg uvf oerguera: naq gurl
ungrq uvz lrg gur zber.

37:6 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Urne, V cenl lbh, guvf qernz juvpu V unir
qernzrq: 37:7 Sbe, orubyq, jr jrer ovaqvat furnirf va gur svryq, naq,
yb, zl furns nebfr, naq nyfb fgbbq hcevtug; naq, orubyq, lbhe furnirf
fgbbq ebhaq nobhg, naq znqr borvfnapr gb zl furns.

37:8 Naq uvf oerguera fnvq gb uvz, Funyg gubh vaqrrq ervta bire hf? be
funyg gubh vaqrrq unir qbzvavba bire hf? Naq gurl ungrq uvz lrg gur
zber sbe uvf qernzf, naq sbe uvf jbeqf.

37:9 Naq ur qernzrq lrg nabgure qernz, naq gbyq vg uvf oerguera, naq
fnvq, Orubyq, V unir qernzrq n qernz zber; naq, orubyq, gur fha naq
gur zbba naq gur ryrira fgnef znqr borvfnapr gb zr.

37:10 Naq ur gbyq vg gb uvf sngure, naq gb uvf oerguera: naq uvf
sngure erohxrq uvz, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Jung vf guvf qernz gung gubh
unfg qernzrq?  Funyy V naq gul zbgure naq gul oerguera vaqrrq pbzr gb
obj qbja bhefryirf gb gurr gb gur rnegu?  37:11 Naq uvf oerguera
raivrq uvz; ohg uvf sngure bofreirq gur fnlvat.

37:12 Naq uvf oerguera jrag gb srrq gurve sngure'f sybpx va Furpurz.

37:13 Naq Vfenry fnvq hagb Wbfrcu, Qb abg gul oerguera srrq gur sybpx
va Furpurz? pbzr, naq V jvyy fraq gurr hagb gurz. Naq ur fnvq gb uvz,
Urer nz V.

37:14 Naq ur fnvq gb uvz, Tb, V cenl gurr, frr jurgure vg or jryy jvgu
gul oerguera, naq jryy jvgu gur sybpxf; naq oevat zr jbeq ntnva. Fb ur
frag uvz bhg bs gur inyr bs Uroeba, naq ur pnzr gb Furpurz.

37:15 Naq n pregnva zna sbhaq uvz, naq, orubyq, ur jnf jnaqrevat va
gur svryq: naq gur zna nfxrq uvz, fnlvat, Jung frrxrfg gubh?  37:16
Naq ur fnvq, V frrx zl oerguera: gryy zr, V cenl gurr, jurer gurl srrq
gurve sybpxf.

37:17 Naq gur zna fnvq, Gurl ner qrcnegrq urapr; sbe V urneq gurz fnl,
Yrg hf tb gb Qbguna. Naq Wbfrcu jrag nsgre uvf oerguera, naq sbhaq
gurz va Qbguna.

37:18 Naq jura gurl fnj uvz nsne bss, rira orsber ur pnzr arne hagb
gurz, gurl pbafcverq ntnvafg uvz gb fynl uvz.

37:19 Naq gurl fnvq bar gb nabgure, Orubyq, guvf qernzre pbzrgu.

37:20 Pbzr abj gurersber, naq yrg hf fynl uvz, naq pnfg uvz vagb fbzr
cvg, naq jr jvyy fnl, Fbzr rivy ornfg ungu qribherq uvz: naq jr funyy
frr jung jvyy orpbzr bs uvf qernzf.

37:21 Naq Erhora urneq vg, naq ur qryvirerq uvz bhg bs gurve unaqf;
naq fnvq, Yrg hf abg xvyy uvz.

37:22 Naq Erhora fnvq hagb gurz, Furq ab oybbq, ohg pnfg uvz vagb guvf
cvg gung vf va gur jvyqrearff, naq ynl ab unaq hcba uvz; gung ur zvtug
evq uvz bhg bs gurve unaqf, gb qryvire uvz gb uvf sngure ntnva.

37:23 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Wbfrcu jnf pbzr hagb uvf oerguera,
gung gurl fgevcg Wbfrcu bhg bs uvf pbng, uvf pbng bs znal pbybhef gung
jnf ba uvz; 37:24 Naq gurl gbbx uvz, naq pnfg uvz vagb n cvg: naq gur
cvg jnf rzcgl, gurer jnf ab jngre va vg.

37:25 Naq gurl fng qbja gb rng oernq: naq gurl yvsgrq hc gurve rlrf
naq ybbxrq, naq, orubyq, n pbzcnal bs Vfuzrryvgrf pnzr sebz Tvyrnq
jvgu gurve pnzryf ornevat fcvprel naq onyz naq zleeu, tbvat gb pneel
vg qbja gb Rtlcg.

37:26 Naq Whqnu fnvq hagb uvf oerguera, Jung cebsvg vf vg vs jr fynl
bhe oebgure, naq pbaprny uvf oybbq?  37:27 Pbzr, naq yrg hf fryy uvz
gb gur Vfuzrryvgrf, naq yrg abg bhe unaq or hcba uvz; sbe ur vf bhe
oebgure naq bhe syrfu. Naq uvf oerguera jrer pbagrag.

37:28 Gura gurer cnffrq ol Zvqvnavgrf zrepunagzra; naq gurl qerj naq
yvsgrq hc Wbfrcu bhg bs gur cvg, naq fbyq Wbfrcu gb gur Vfuzrryvgrf
sbe gjragl cvrprf bs fvyire: naq gurl oebhtug Wbfrcu vagb Rtlcg.

37:29 Naq Erhora erghearq hagb gur cvg; naq, orubyq, Wbfrcu jnf abg va
gur cvg; naq ur erag uvf pybgurf.

37:30 Naq ur erghearq hagb uvf oerguera, naq fnvq, Gur puvyq vf abg;
naq V, juvgure funyy V tb?  37:31 Naq gurl gbbx Wbfrcu'f pbng, naq
xvyyrq n xvq bs gur tbngf, naq qvccrq gur pbng va gur oybbq; 37:32 Naq
gurl frag gur pbng bs znal pbybhef, naq gurl oebhtug vg gb gurve
sngure; naq fnvq, Guvf unir jr sbhaq: xabj abj jurgure vg or gul fba'f
pbng be ab.

37:33 Naq ur xarj vg, naq fnvq, Vg vf zl fba'f pbng; na rivy ornfg
ungu qribherq uvz; Wbfrcu vf jvgubhg qbhog erag va cvrprf.

37:34 Naq Wnpbo erag uvf pybgurf, naq chg fnpxpybgu hcba uvf ybvaf,
naq zbhearq sbe uvf fba znal qnlf.

37:35 Naq nyy uvf fbaf naq nyy uvf qnhtugref ebfr hc gb pbzsbeg uvz;
ohg ur ershfrq gb or pbzsbegrq; naq ur fnvq, Sbe V jvyy tb qbja vagb
gur tenir hagb zl fba zbheavat. Guhf uvf sngure jrcg sbe uvz.

37:36 Naq gur Zvqvnavgrf fbyq uvz vagb Rtlcg hagb Cbgvcune, na bssvpre
bs Cunenbu'f, naq pncgnva bs gur thneq.

38:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng gung gvzr, gung Whqnu jrag qbja sebz uvf
oerguera, naq ghearq va gb n pregnva Nqhyynzvgr, jubfr anzr jnf Uvenu.

38:2 Naq Whqnu fnj gurer n qnhtugre bs n pregnva Pnannavgr, jubfr anzr
jnf Fuhnu; naq ur gbbx ure, naq jrag va hagb ure.

38:3 Naq fur pbaprvirq, naq oner n fba; naq ur pnyyrq uvf anzr Re.

38:4 Naq fur pbaprvirq ntnva, naq oner n fba; naq fur pnyyrq uvf anzr
Bana.

38:5 Naq fur lrg ntnva pbaprvirq, naq oner n fba; naq pnyyrq uvf anzr
Furynu: naq ur jnf ng Purmvo, jura fur oner uvz.

38:6 Naq Whqnu gbbx n jvsr sbe Re uvf svefgobea, jubfr anzr jnf Gnzne.

38:7 Naq Re, Whqnu'f svefgobea, jnf jvpxrq va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ;
naq gur YBEQ fyrj uvz.

38:8 Naq Whqnu fnvq hagb Bana, Tb va hagb gul oebgure'f jvsr, naq
zneel ure, naq envfr hc frrq gb gul oebgure.

38:9 Naq Bana xarj gung gur frrq fubhyq abg or uvf; naq vg pnzr gb
cnff, jura ur jrag va hagb uvf oebgure'f jvsr, gung ur fcvyyrq vg ba
gur tebhaq, yrfg gung ur fubhyq tvir frrq gb uvf oebgure.

38:10 Naq gur guvat juvpu ur qvq qvfcyrnfrq gur YBEQ: jurersber ur
fyrj uvz nyfb.

38:11 Gura fnvq Whqnu gb Gnzne uvf qnhtugre va ynj, Erznva n jvqbj ng
gul sngure'f ubhfr, gvyy Furynu zl fba or tebja: sbe ur fnvq, Yrfg
crenqiragher ur qvr nyfb, nf uvf oerguera qvq. Naq Gnzne jrag naq
qjryg va ure sngure'f ubhfr.

38:12 Naq va cebprff bs gvzr gur qnhtugre bs Fuhnu Whqnu'f jvsr qvrq;
naq Whqnu jnf pbzsbegrq, naq jrag hc hagb uvf furrcfurneref gb
Gvzangu, ur naq uvf sevraq Uvenu gur Nqhyynzvgr.

38:13 Naq vg jnf gbyq Gnzne, fnlvat, Orubyq gul sngure va ynj tbrgu hc
gb Gvzangu gb furne uvf furrc.

38:14 Naq fur chg ure jvqbj'f tnezragf bss sebz ure, naq pbirerq ure
jvgu n invy, naq jenccrq urefrys, naq fng va na bcra cynpr, juvpu vf
ol gur jnl gb Gvzangu; sbe fur fnj gung Furynu jnf tebja, naq fur jnf
abg tvira hagb uvz gb jvsr.

38:15 Jura Whqnu fnj ure, ur gubhtug ure gb or na uneybg; orpnhfr fur
unq pbirerq ure snpr.

38:16 Naq ur ghearq hagb ure ol gur jnl, naq fnvq, Tb gb, V cenl gurr,
yrg zr pbzr va hagb gurr; (sbe ur xarj abg gung fur jnf uvf qnhtugre
va ynj.) Naq fur fnvq, Jung jvyg gubh tvir zr, gung gubh znlrfg pbzr
va hagb zr?  38:17 Naq ur fnvq, V jvyy fraq gurr n xvq sebz gur sybpx.
Naq fur fnvq, Jvyg gubh tvir zr n cyrqtr, gvyy gubh fraq vg?  38:18
Naq ur fnvq, Jung cyrqtr funyy V tvir gurr? Naq fur fnvq, Gul fvtarg,
naq gul oenpryrgf, naq gul fgnss gung vf va guvar unaq. Naq ur tnir vg
ure, naq pnzr va hagb ure, naq fur pbaprvirq ol uvz.

38:19 Naq fur nebfr, naq jrag njnl, naq ynvq ol ure invy sebz ure, naq
chg ba gur tnezragf bs ure jvqbjubbq.

38:20 Naq Whqnu frag gur xvq ol gur unaq bs uvf sevraq gur Nqhyynzvgr,
gb erprvir uvf cyrqtr sebz gur jbzna'f unaq: ohg ur sbhaq ure abg.

38:21 Gura ur nfxrq gur zra bs gung cynpr, fnlvat, Jurer vf gur
uneybg, gung jnf bcrayl ol gur jnl fvqr? Naq gurl fnvq, Gurer jnf ab
uneybg va guvf cynpr.

38:22 Naq ur erghearq gb Whqnu, naq fnvq, V pnaabg svaq ure; naq nyfb
gur zra bs gur cynpr fnvq, gung gurer jnf ab uneybg va guvf cynpr.

38:23 Naq Whqnu fnvq, Yrg ure gnxr vg gb ure, yrfg jr or funzrq:
orubyq, V frag guvf xvq, naq gubh unfg abg sbhaq ure.

38:24 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nobhg guerr zbaguf nsgre, gung vg jnf gbyq
Whqnu, fnlvat, Gnzne gul qnhtugre va ynj ungu cynlrq gur uneybg; naq
nyfb, orubyq, fur vf jvgu puvyq ol juberqbz. Naq Whqnu fnvq, Oevat ure
sbegu, naq yrg ure or oheag.

38:25 Jura fur jnf oebhtug sbegu, fur frag gb ure sngure va ynj,
fnlvat, Ol gur zna, jubfr gurfr ner, nz V jvgu puvyq: naq fur fnvq,
Qvfprea, V cenl gurr, jubfr ner gurfr, gur fvtarg, naq oenpryrgf, naq
fgnss.

38:26 Naq Whqnu npxabjyrqtrq gurz, naq fnvq, Fur ungu orra zber
evtugrbhf guna V; orpnhfr gung V tnir ure abg gb Furynu zl fba. Naq ur
xarj ure ntnva ab zber.

38:27 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gur gvzr bs ure geninvy, gung, orubyq,
gjvaf jrer va ure jbzo.

38:28 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura fur geninvyrq, gung gur bar chg bhg
uvf unaq: naq gur zvqjvsr gbbx naq obhaq hcba uvf unaq n fpneyrg
guernq, fnlvat, Guvf pnzr bhg svefg.

38:29 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf ur qerj onpx uvf unaq, gung, orubyq, uvf
oebgure pnzr bhg: naq fur fnvq, Ubj unfg gubh oebxra sbegu? guvf
oernpu or hcba gurr: gurersber uvf anzr jnf pnyyrq Cunerm.

38:30 Naq nsgrejneq pnzr bhg uvf oebgure, gung unq gur fpneyrg guernq
hcba uvf unaq: naq uvf anzr jnf pnyyrq Mnenu.

39:1 Naq Wbfrcu jnf oebhtug qbja gb Rtlcg; naq Cbgvcune, na bssvpre bs
Cunenbu, pncgnva bs gur thneq, na Rtlcgvna, obhtug uvz bs gur unaqf bs
gur Vfuzrryvgrf, juvpu unq oebhtug uvz qbja guvgure.

39:2 Naq gur YBEQ jnf jvgu Wbfrcu, naq ur jnf n cebfcrebhf zna; naq ur
jnf va gur ubhfr bs uvf znfgre gur Rtlcgvna.

39:3 Naq uvf znfgre fnj gung gur YBEQ jnf jvgu uvz, naq gung gur YBEQ
znqr nyy gung ur qvq gb cebfcre va uvf unaq.

39:4 Naq Wbfrcu sbhaq tenpr va uvf fvtug, naq ur freirq uvz: naq ur
znqr uvz birefrre bire uvf ubhfr, naq nyy gung ur unq ur chg vagb uvf
unaq.

39:5 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff sebz gur gvzr gung ur unq znqr uvz birefrre
va uvf ubhfr, naq bire nyy gung ur unq, gung gur YBEQ oyrffrq gur
Rtlcgvna'f ubhfr sbe Wbfrcu'f fnxr; naq gur oyrffvat bs gur YBEQ jnf
hcba nyy gung ur unq va gur ubhfr, naq va gur svryq.

39:6 Naq ur yrsg nyy gung ur unq va Wbfrcu'f unaq; naq ur xarj abg
bhtug ur unq, fnir gur oernq juvpu ur qvq rng. Naq Wbfrcu jnf n tbbqyl
crefba, naq jryy snibherq.

39:7 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre gurfr guvatf, gung uvf znfgre'f jvsr
pnfg ure rlrf hcba Wbfrcu; naq fur fnvq, Yvr jvgu zr.

39:8 Ohg ur ershfrq, naq fnvq hagb uvf znfgre'f jvsr, Orubyq, zl
znfgre jbggrgu abg jung vf jvgu zr va gur ubhfr, naq ur ungu pbzzvggrq
nyy gung ur ungu gb zl unaq; 39:9 Gurer vf abar terngre va guvf ubhfr
guna V; arvgure ungu ur xrcg onpx nal guvat sebz zr ohg gurr, orpnhfr
gubh neg uvf jvsr: ubj gura pna V qb guvf terng jvpxrqarff, naq fva
ntnvafg Tbq?  39:10 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf fur fcnxr gb Wbfrcu qnl ol
qnl, gung ur urnexrarq abg hagb ure, gb yvr ol ure, be gb or jvgu ure.

39:11 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nobhg guvf gvzr, gung Wbfrcu jrag vagb gur
ubhfr gb qb uvf ohfvarff; naq gurer jnf abar bs gur zra bs gur ubhfr
gurer jvguva.

39:12 Naq fur pnhtug uvz ol uvf tnezrag, fnlvat, Yvr jvgu zr: naq ur
yrsg uvf tnezrag va ure unaq, naq syrq, naq tbg uvz bhg.

39:13 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura fur fnj gung ur unq yrsg uvf tnezrag
va ure unaq, naq jnf syrq sbegu, 39:14 Gung fur pnyyrq hagb gur zra bs
ure ubhfr, naq fcnxr hagb gurz, fnlvat, Frr, ur ungu oebhtug va na
Uroerj hagb hf gb zbpx hf; ur pnzr va hagb zr gb yvr jvgu zr, naq V
pevrq jvgu n ybhq ibvpr: 39:15 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura ur urneq gung
V yvsgrq hc zl ibvpr naq pevrq, gung ur yrsg uvf tnezrag jvgu zr, naq
syrq, naq tbg uvz bhg.

39:16 Naq fur ynvq hc uvf tnezrag ol ure, hagvy uvf ybeq pnzr ubzr.

39:17 Naq fur fcnxr hagb uvz nppbeqvat gb gurfr jbeqf, fnlvat, Gur
Uroerj freinag, juvpu gubh unfg oebhtug hagb hf, pnzr va hagb zr gb
zbpx zr: 39:18 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf V yvsgrq hc zl ibvpr naq pevrq,
gung ur yrsg uvf tnezrag jvgu zr, naq syrq bhg.

39:19 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura uvf znfgre urneq gur jbeqf bs uvf
jvsr, juvpu fur fcnxr hagb uvz, fnlvat, Nsgre guvf znaare qvq gul
freinag gb zr; gung uvf jengu jnf xvaqyrq.

39:20 Naq Wbfrcu'f znfgre gbbx uvz, naq chg uvz vagb gur cevfba, n
cynpr jurer gur xvat'f cevfbaref jrer obhaq: naq ur jnf gurer va gur
cevfba.

39:21 Ohg gur YBEQ jnf jvgu Wbfrcu, naq furjrq uvz zrepl, naq tnir uvz
snibhe va gur fvtug bs gur xrrcre bs gur cevfba.

39:22 Naq gur xrrcre bs gur cevfba pbzzvggrq gb Wbfrcu'f unaq nyy gur
cevfbaref gung jrer va gur cevfba; naq jungfbrire gurl qvq gurer, ur
jnf gur qbre bs vg.

39:23 Gur xrrcre bs gur cevfba ybbxrq abg gb nal guvat gung jnf haqre
uvf unaq; orpnhfr gur YBEQ jnf jvgu uvz, naq gung juvpu ur qvq, gur
YBEQ znqr vg gb cebfcre.

40:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre gurfr guvatf, gung gur ohgyre bs gur
xvat bs Rtlcg naq uvf onxre unq bssraqrq gurve ybeq gur xvat bs Rtlcg.

40:2 Naq Cunenbu jnf jebgu ntnvafg gjb bs uvf bssvpref, ntnvafg gur
puvrs bs gur ohgyref, naq ntnvafg gur puvrs bs gur onxref.

40:3 Naq ur chg gurz va jneq va gur ubhfr bs gur pncgnva bs gur thneq,
vagb gur cevfba, gur cynpr jurer Wbfrcu jnf obhaq.

40:4 Naq gur pncgnva bs gur thneq punetrq Wbfrcu jvgu gurz, naq ur
freirq gurz: naq gurl pbagvahrq n frnfba va jneq.

40:5 Naq gurl qernzrq n qernz obgu bs gurz, rnpu zna uvf qernz va bar
avtug, rnpu zna nppbeqvat gb gur vagrecergngvba bs uvf qernz, gur
ohgyre naq gur onxre bs gur xvat bs Rtlcg, juvpu jrer obhaq va gur
cevfba.

40:6 Naq Wbfrcu pnzr va hagb gurz va gur zbeavat, naq ybbxrq hcba
gurz, naq, orubyq, gurl jrer fnq.

40:7 Naq ur nfxrq Cunenbu'f bssvpref gung jrer jvgu uvz va gur jneq bs
uvf ybeq'f ubhfr, fnlvat, Jurersber ybbx lr fb fnqyl gb qnl?  40:8 Naq
gurl fnvq hagb uvz, Jr unir qernzrq n qernz, naq gurer vf ab
vagrecergre bs vg. Naq Wbfrcu fnvq hagb gurz, Qb abg vagrecergngvbaf
orybat gb Tbq? gryy zr gurz, V cenl lbh.

40:9 Naq gur puvrs ohgyre gbyq uvf qernz gb Wbfrcu, naq fnvq gb uvz,
Va zl qernz, orubyq, n ivar jnf orsber zr; 40:10 Naq va gur ivar jrer
guerr oenapurf: naq vg jnf nf gubhtu vg ohqqrq, naq ure oybffbzf fubg
sbegu; naq gur pyhfgref gurerbs oebhtug sbegu evcr tencrf: 40:11 Naq
Cunenbu'f phc jnf va zl unaq: naq V gbbx gur tencrf, naq cerffrq gurz
vagb Cunenbu'f phc, naq V tnir gur phc vagb Cunenbu'f unaq.

40:12 Naq Wbfrcu fnvq hagb uvz, Guvf vf gur vagrecergngvba bs vg: Gur
guerr oenapurf ner guerr qnlf: 40:13 Lrg jvguva guerr qnlf funyy
Cunenbu yvsg hc guvar urnq, naq erfgber gurr hagb gul cynpr: naq gubh
funyg qryvire Cunenbu'f phc vagb uvf unaq, nsgre gur sbezre znaare
jura gubh jnfg uvf ohgyre.

40:14 Ohg guvax ba zr jura vg funyy or jryy jvgu gurr, naq furj
xvaqarff, V cenl gurr, hagb zr, naq znxr zragvba bs zr hagb Cunenbu,
naq oevat zr bhg bs guvf ubhfr: 40:15 Sbe vaqrrq V jnf fgbyra njnl bhg
bs gur ynaq bs gur Uroerjf: naq urer nyfb unir V qbar abguvat gung
gurl fubhyq chg zr vagb gur qhatrba.

40:16 Jura gur puvrs onxre fnj gung gur vagrecergngvba jnf tbbq, ur
fnvq hagb Wbfrcu, V nyfb jnf va zl qernz, naq, orubyq, V unq guerr
juvgr onfxrgf ba zl urnq: 40:17 Naq va gur hccrezbfg onfxrg gurer jnf
bs nyy znaare bs onxrzrngf sbe Cunenbu; naq gur oveqf qvq rng gurz bhg
bs gur onfxrg hcba zl urnq.

40:18 Naq Wbfrcu nafjrerq naq fnvq, Guvf vf gur vagrecergngvba
gurerbs: Gur guerr onfxrgf ner guerr qnlf: 40:19 Lrg jvguva guerr qnlf
funyy Cunenbu yvsg hc gul urnq sebz bss gurr, naq funyy unat gurr ba n
gerr; naq gur oveqf funyy rng gul syrfu sebz bss gurr.

40:20 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff gur guveq qnl, juvpu jnf Cunenbu'f oveguqnl,
gung ur znqr n srnfg hagb nyy uvf freinagf: naq ur yvsgrq hc gur urnq
bs gur puvrs ohgyre naq bs gur puvrs onxre nzbat uvf freinagf.

40:21 Naq ur erfgberq gur puvrs ohgyre hagb uvf ohgyrefuvc ntnva; naq
ur tnir gur phc vagb Cunenbu'f unaq: 40:22 Ohg ur unatrq gur puvrs
onxre: nf Wbfrcu unq vagrecergrq gb gurz.

40:23 Lrg qvq abg gur puvrs ohgyre erzrzore Wbfrcu, ohg sbetng uvz.

41:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng gur raq bs gjb shyy lrnef, gung Cunenbu
qernzrq: naq, orubyq, ur fgbbq ol gur evire.

41:2 Naq, orubyq, gurer pnzr hc bhg bs gur evire frira jryy snibherq
xvar naq sngsyrfurq; naq gurl srq va n zrnqbj.

41:3 Naq, orubyq, frira bgure xvar pnzr hc nsgre gurz bhg bs gur
evire, vyy snibherq naq yrnasyrfurq; naq fgbbq ol gur bgure xvar hcba
gur oevax bs gur evire.

41:4 Naq gur vyy snibherq naq yrnasyrfurq xvar qvq rng hc gur frira
jryy snibherq naq sng xvar. Fb Cunenbu njbxr.

41:5 Naq ur fyrcg naq qernzrq gur frpbaq gvzr: naq, orubyq, frira rnef
bs pbea pnzr hc hcba bar fgnyx, enax naq tbbq.

41:6 Naq, orubyq, frira guva rnef naq oynfgrq jvgu gur rnfg jvaq
fcehat hc nsgre gurz.

41:7 Naq gur frira guva rnef qribherq gur frira enax naq shyy rnef.
Naq Cunenbu njbxr, naq, orubyq, vg jnf n qernz.

41:8 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gur zbeavat gung uvf fcvevg jnf gebhoyrq;
naq ur frag naq pnyyrq sbe nyy gur zntvpvnaf bs Rtlcg, naq nyy gur
jvfr zra gurerbs: naq Cunenbu gbyq gurz uvf qernz; ohg gurer jnf abar
gung pbhyq vagrecerg gurz hagb Cunenbu.

41:9 Gura fcnxr gur puvrs ohgyre hagb Cunenbu, fnlvat, V qb erzrzore
zl snhygf guvf qnl: 41:10 Cunenbu jnf jebgu jvgu uvf freinagf, naq chg
zr va jneq va gur pncgnva bs gur thneq'f ubhfr, obgu zr naq gur puvrs
onxre: 41:11 Naq jr qernzrq n qernz va bar avtug, V naq ur; jr qernzrq
rnpu zna nppbeqvat gb gur vagrecergngvba bs uvf qernz.

41:12 Naq gurer jnf gurer jvgu hf n lbhat zna, na Uroerj, freinag gb
gur pncgnva bs gur thneq; naq jr gbyq uvz, naq ur vagrecergrq gb hf
bhe qernzf; gb rnpu zna nppbeqvat gb uvf qernz ur qvq vagrecerg.

41:13 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf ur vagrecergrq gb hf, fb vg jnf; zr ur
erfgberq hagb zvar bssvpr, naq uvz ur unatrq.

41:14 Gura Cunenbu frag naq pnyyrq Wbfrcu, naq gurl oebhtug uvz
unfgvyl bhg bs gur qhatrba: naq ur funirq uvzfrys, naq punatrq uvf
envzrag, naq pnzr va hagb Cunenbu.

41:15 Naq Cunenbu fnvq hagb Wbfrcu, V unir qernzrq n qernz, naq gurer
vf abar gung pna vagrecerg vg: naq V unir urneq fnl bs gurr, gung gubh
pnafg haqrefgnaq n qernz gb vagrecerg vg.

41:16 Naq Wbfrcu nafjrerq Cunenbu, fnlvat, Vg vf abg va zr: Tbq funyy
tvir Cunenbu na nafjre bs crnpr.

41:17 Naq Cunenbu fnvq hagb Wbfrcu, Va zl qernz, orubyq, V fgbbq hcba
gur onax bs gur evire: 41:18 Naq, orubyq, gurer pnzr hc bhg bs gur
evire frira xvar, sngsyrfurq naq jryy snibherq; naq gurl srq va n
zrnqbj: 41:19 Naq, orubyq, frira bgure xvar pnzr hc nsgre gurz, cbbe
naq irel vyy snibherq naq yrnasyrfurq, fhpu nf V arire fnj va nyy gur
ynaq bs Rtlcg sbe onqarff: 41:20 Naq gur yrna naq gur vyy snibherq
xvar qvq rng hc gur svefg frira sng xvar: 41:21 Naq jura gurl unq
rngra gurz hc, vg pbhyq abg or xabja gung gurl unq rngra gurz; ohg
gurl jrer fgvyy vyy snibherq, nf ng gur ortvaavat. Fb V njbxr.

41:22 Naq V fnj va zl qernz, naq, orubyq, frira rnef pnzr hc va bar
fgnyx, shyy naq tbbq: 41:23 Naq, orubyq, frira rnef, jvgurerq, guva,
naq oynfgrq jvgu gur rnfg jvaq, fcehat hc nsgre gurz: 41:24 Naq gur
guva rnef qribherq gur frira tbbq rnef: naq V gbyq guvf hagb gur
zntvpvnaf; ohg gurer jnf abar gung pbhyq qrpyner vg gb zr.

41:25 Naq Wbfrcu fnvq hagb Cunenbu, Gur qernz bs Cunenbu vf bar: Tbq
ungu furjrq Cunenbu jung ur vf nobhg gb qb.

41:26 Gur frira tbbq xvar ner frira lrnef; naq gur frira tbbq rnef ner
frira lrnef: gur qernz vf bar.

41:27 Naq gur frira guva naq vyy snibherq xvar gung pnzr hc nsgre gurz
ner frira lrnef; naq gur frira rzcgl rnef oynfgrq jvgu gur rnfg jvaq
funyy or frira lrnef bs snzvar.

41:28 Guvf vf gur guvat juvpu V unir fcbxra hagb Cunenbu: Jung Tbq vf
nobhg gb qb ur furjrgu hagb Cunenbu.

41:29 Orubyq, gurer pbzr frira lrnef bs terng cyragl guebhtubhg nyy
gur ynaq bs Rtlcg: 41:30 Naq gurer funyy nevfr nsgre gurz frira lrnef
bs snzvar; naq nyy gur cyragl funyy or sbetbggra va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg;
naq gur snzvar funyy pbafhzr gur ynaq; 41:31 Naq gur cyragl funyy abg
or xabja va gur ynaq ol ernfba bs gung snzvar sbyybjvat; sbe vg funyy
or irel tevribhf.

41:32 Naq sbe gung gur qernz jnf qbhoyrq hagb Cunenbu gjvpr; vg vf
orpnhfr gur guvat vf rfgnoyvfurq ol Tbq, naq Tbq jvyy fubegyl oevat vg
gb cnff.

41:33 Abj gurersber yrg Cunenbu ybbx bhg n zna qvfperrg naq jvfr, naq
frg uvz bire gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

41:34 Yrg Cunenbu qb guvf, naq yrg uvz nccbvag bssvpref bire gur ynaq,
naq gnxr hc gur svsgu cneg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg va gur frira cyragrbhf
lrnef.

41:35 Naq yrg gurz tngure nyy gur sbbq bs gubfr tbbq lrnef gung pbzr,
naq ynl hc pbea haqre gur unaq bs Cunenbu, naq yrg gurz xrrc sbbq va
gur pvgvrf.

41:36 Naq gung sbbq funyy or sbe fgber gb gur ynaq ntnvafg gur frira
lrnef bs snzvar, juvpu funyy or va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg; gung gur ynaq
crevfu abg guebhtu gur snzvar.

41:37 Naq gur guvat jnf tbbq va gur rlrf bs Cunenbu, naq va gur rlrf
bs nyy uvf freinagf.

41:38 Naq Cunenbu fnvq hagb uvf freinagf, Pna jr svaq fhpu n bar nf
guvf vf, n zna va jubz gur Fcvevg bs Tbq vf?  41:39 Naq Cunenbu fnvq
hagb Wbfrcu, Sbenfzhpu nf Tbq ungu furjrq gurr nyy guvf, gurer vf abar
fb qvfperrg naq jvfr nf gubh neg: 41:40 Gubh funyg or bire zl ubhfr,
naq nppbeqvat hagb gul jbeq funyy nyy zl crbcyr or ehyrq: bayl va gur
guebar jvyy V or terngre guna gubh.

41:41 Naq Cunenbu fnvq hagb Wbfrcu, Frr, V unir frg gurr bire nyy gur
ynaq bs Rtlcg.

41:42 Naq Cunenbu gbbx bss uvf evat sebz uvf unaq, naq chg vg hcba
Wbfrcu'f unaq, naq neenlrq uvz va irfgherf bs svar yvara, naq chg n
tbyq punva nobhg uvf arpx; 41:43 Naq ur znqr uvz gb evqr va gur frpbaq
punevbg juvpu ur unq; naq gurl pevrq orsber uvz, Obj gur xarr: naq ur
znqr uvz ehyre bire nyy gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

41:44 Naq Cunenbu fnvq hagb Wbfrcu, V nz Cunenbu, naq jvgubhg gurr
funyy ab zna yvsg hc uvf unaq be sbbg va nyy gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

41:45 Naq Cunenbu pnyyrq Wbfrcu'f anzr Mncuangucnnarnu; naq ur tnir
uvz gb jvsr Nfrangu gur qnhtugre bs Cbgvcurenu cevrfg bs Ba. Naq
Wbfrcu jrag bhg bire nyy gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

41:46 Naq Wbfrcu jnf guvegl lrnef byq jura ur fgbbq orsber Cunenbu
xvat bs Rtlcg. Naq Wbfrcu jrag bhg sebz gur cerfrapr bs Cunenbu, naq
jrag guebhtubhg nyy gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

41:47 Naq va gur frira cyragrbhf lrnef gur rnegu oebhtug sbegu ol
unaqshyf.

41:48 Naq ur tngurerq hc nyy gur sbbq bs gur frira lrnef, juvpu jrer
va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, naq ynvq hc gur sbbq va gur pvgvrf: gur sbbq bs
gur svryq, juvpu jnf ebhaq nobhg rirel pvgl, ynvq ur hc va gur fnzr.

41:49 Naq Wbfrcu tngurerq pbea nf gur fnaq bs gur frn, irel zhpu,
hagvy ur yrsg ahzorevat; sbe vg jnf jvgubhg ahzore.

41:50 Naq hagb Wbfrcu jrer obea gjb fbaf orsber gur lrnef bs snzvar
pnzr, juvpu Nfrangu gur qnhtugre bs Cbgvcurenu cevrfg bs Ba oner hagb
uvz.

41:51 Naq Wbfrcu pnyyrq gur anzr bs gur svefgobea Znanffru: Sbe Tbq,
fnvq ur, ungu znqr zr sbetrg nyy zl gbvy, naq nyy zl sngure'f ubhfr.

41:52 Naq gur anzr bs gur frpbaq pnyyrq ur Rcuenvz: Sbe Tbq ungu
pnhfrq zr gb or sehvgshy va gur ynaq bs zl nssyvpgvba.

41:53 Naq gur frira lrnef bs cyragrbhfarff, gung jnf va gur ynaq bs
Rtlcg, jrer raqrq.

41:54 Naq gur frira lrnef bs qrnegu ortna gb pbzr, nppbeqvat nf Wbfrcu
unq fnvq: naq gur qrnegu jnf va nyy ynaqf; ohg va nyy gur ynaq bs
Rtlcg gurer jnf oernq.

41:55 Naq jura nyy gur ynaq bs Rtlcg jnf snzvfurq, gur crbcyr pevrq gb
Cunenbu sbe oernq: naq Cunenbu fnvq hagb nyy gur Rtlcgvnaf, Tb hagb
Wbfrcu; jung ur fnvgu gb lbh, qb.

41:56 Naq gur snzvar jnf bire nyy gur snpr bs gur rnegu: naq Wbfrcu
bcrarq nyy gur fgberubhfrf, naq fbyq hagb gur Rtlcgvnaf; naq gur
snzvar jnkrq fber va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

41:57 Naq nyy pbhagevrf pnzr vagb Rtlcg gb Wbfrcu sbe gb ohl pbea;
orpnhfr gung gur snzvar jnf fb fber va nyy ynaqf.

42:1 Abj jura Wnpbo fnj gung gurer jnf pbea va Rtlcg, Wnpbo fnvq hagb
uvf fbaf, Jul qb lr ybbx bar hcba nabgure?  42:2 Naq ur fnvq, Orubyq,
V unir urneq gung gurer vf pbea va Rtlcg: trg lbh qbja guvgure, naq
ohl sbe hf sebz gurapr; gung jr znl yvir, naq abg qvr.

42:3 Naq Wbfrcu'f gra oerguera jrag qbja gb ohl pbea va Rtlcg.

42:4 Ohg Orawnzva, Wbfrcu'f oebgure, Wnpbo frag abg jvgu uvf oerguera;
sbe ur fnvq, Yrfg crenqiragher zvfpuvrs orsnyy uvz.

42:5 Naq gur fbaf bs Vfenry pnzr gb ohl pbea nzbat gubfr gung pnzr:
sbe gur snzvar jnf va gur ynaq bs Pnanna.

42:6 Naq Wbfrcu jnf gur tbireabe bire gur ynaq, naq ur vg jnf gung
fbyq gb nyy gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq: naq Wbfrcu'f oerguera pnzr, naq
objrq qbja gurzfryirf orsber uvz jvgu gurve snprf gb gur rnegu.

42:7 Naq Wbfrcu fnj uvf oerguera, naq ur xarj gurz, ohg znqr uvzfrys
fgenatr hagb gurz, naq fcnxr ebhtuyl hagb gurz; naq ur fnvq hagb gurz,
Jurapr pbzr lr? Naq gurl fnvq, Sebz gur ynaq bs Pnanna gb ohl sbbq.

42:8 Naq Wbfrcu xarj uvf oerguera, ohg gurl xarj abg uvz.

42:9 Naq Wbfrcu erzrzorerq gur qernzf juvpu ur qernzrq bs gurz, naq
fnvq hagb gurz, Lr ner fcvrf; gb frr gur anxrqarff bs gur ynaq lr ner
pbzr.

42:10 Naq gurl fnvq hagb uvz, Anl, zl ybeq, ohg gb ohl sbbq ner gul
freinagf pbzr.

42:11 Jr ner nyy bar zna'f fbaf; jr ner gehr zra, gul freinagf ner ab
fcvrf.

42:12 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Anl, ohg gb frr gur anxrqarff bs gur ynaq
lr ner pbzr.

42:13 Naq gurl fnvq, Gul freinagf ner gjryir oerguera, gur fbaf bs bar
zna va gur ynaq bs Pnanna; naq, orubyq, gur lbhatrfg vf guvf qnl jvgu
bhe sngure, naq bar vf abg.

42:14 Naq Wbfrcu fnvq hagb gurz, Gung vf vg gung V fcnxr hagb lbh,
fnlvat, Lr ner fcvrf: 42:15 Urerol lr funyy or cebirq: Ol gur yvsr bs
Cunenbu lr funyy abg tb sbegu urapr, rkprcg lbhe lbhatrfg oebgure pbzr
uvgure.

42:16 Fraq bar bs lbh, naq yrg uvz srgpu lbhe oebgure, naq lr funyy or
xrcg va cevfba, gung lbhe jbeqf znl or cebirq, jurgure gurer or nal
gehgu va lbh: be ryfr ol gur yvsr bs Cunenbu fheryl lr ner fcvrf.

42:17 Naq ur chg gurz nyy gbtrgure vagb jneq guerr qnlf.

42:18 Naq Wbfrcu fnvq hagb gurz gur guveq qnl, Guvf qb, naq yvir; sbe
V srne Tbq: 42:19 Vs lr or gehr zra, yrg bar bs lbhe oerguera or obhaq
va gur ubhfr bs lbhe cevfba: tb lr, pneel pbea sbe gur snzvar bs lbhe
ubhfrf: 42:20 Ohg oevat lbhe lbhatrfg oebgure hagb zr; fb funyy lbhe
jbeqf or irevsvrq, naq lr funyy abg qvr. Naq gurl qvq fb.

42:21 Naq gurl fnvq bar gb nabgure, Jr ner irevyl thvygl pbapreavat
bhe oebgure, va gung jr fnj gur nathvfu bs uvf fbhy, jura ur orfbhtug
hf, naq jr jbhyq abg urne; gurersber vf guvf qvfgerff pbzr hcba hf.

42:22 Naq Erhora nafjrerq gurz, fnlvat, Fcnxr V abg hagb lbh, fnlvat,
Qb abg fva ntnvafg gur puvyq; naq lr jbhyq abg urne? gurersber,
orubyq, nyfb uvf oybbq vf erdhverq.

42:23 Naq gurl xarj abg gung Wbfrcu haqrefgbbq gurz; sbe ur fcnxr hagb
gurz ol na vagrecergre.

42:24 Naq ur ghearq uvzfrys nobhg sebz gurz, naq jrcg; naq erghearq gb
gurz ntnva, naq pbzzharq jvgu gurz, naq gbbx sebz gurz Fvzrba, naq
obhaq uvz orsber gurve rlrf.

42:25 Gura Wbfrcu pbzznaqrq gb svyy gurve fnpxf jvgu pbea, naq gb
erfgber rirel zna'f zbarl vagb uvf fnpx, naq gb tvir gurz cebivfvba
sbe gur jnl: naq guhf qvq ur hagb gurz.

42:26 Naq gurl ynqrq gurve nffrf jvgu gur pbea, naq qrcnegrq gurapr.

42:27 Naq nf bar bs gurz bcrarq uvf fnpx gb tvir uvf nff cebiraqre va
gur vaa, ur rfcvrq uvf zbarl; sbe, orubyq, vg jnf va uvf fnpx'f zbhgu.

42:28 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvf oerguera, Zl zbarl vf erfgberq; naq, yb, vg
vf rira va zl fnpx: naq gurve urneg snvyrq gurz, naq gurl jrer nsenvq,
fnlvat bar gb nabgure, Jung vf guvf gung Tbq ungu qbar hagb hf?  42:29
Naq gurl pnzr hagb Wnpbo gurve sngure hagb gur ynaq bs Pnanna, naq
gbyq uvz nyy gung orsryy hagb gurz; fnlvat, 42:30 Gur zna, jub vf gur
ybeq bs gur ynaq, fcnxr ebhtuyl gb hf, naq gbbx hf sbe fcvrf bs gur
pbhagel.

42:31 Naq jr fnvq hagb uvz, Jr ner gehr zra; jr ner ab fcvrf: 42:32 Jr
or gjryir oerguera, fbaf bs bhe sngure; bar vf abg, naq gur lbhatrfg
vf guvf qnl jvgu bhe sngure va gur ynaq bs Pnanna.

42:33 Naq gur zna, gur ybeq bs gur pbhagel, fnvq hagb hf, Urerol funyy
V xabj gung lr ner gehr zra; yrnir bar bs lbhe oerguera urer jvgu zr,
naq gnxr sbbq sbe gur snzvar bs lbhe ubhfrubyqf, naq or tbar: 42:34
Naq oevat lbhe lbhatrfg oebgure hagb zr: gura funyy V xabj gung lr ner
ab fcvrf, ohg gung lr ner gehr zra: fb jvyy V qryvire lbh lbhe
oebgure, naq lr funyy genssvpx va gur ynaq.

42:35 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nf gurl rzcgvrq gurve fnpxf, gung, orubyq,
rirel zna'f ohaqyr bs zbarl jnf va uvf fnpx: naq jura obgu gurl naq
gurve sngure fnj gur ohaqyrf bs zbarl, gurl jrer nsenvq.

42:36 Naq Wnpbo gurve sngure fnvq hagb gurz, Zr unir lr orernirq bs zl
puvyqera: Wbfrcu vf abg, naq Fvzrba vf abg, naq lr jvyy gnxr Orawnzva
njnl: nyy gurfr guvatf ner ntnvafg zr.

42:37 Naq Erhora fcnxr hagb uvf sngure, fnlvat, Fynl zl gjb fbaf, vs V
oevat uvz abg gb gurr: qryvire uvz vagb zl unaq, naq V jvyy oevat uvz
gb gurr ntnva.

42:38 Naq ur fnvq, Zl fba funyy abg tb qbja jvgu lbh; sbe uvf oebgure
vf qrnq, naq ur vf yrsg nybar: vs zvfpuvrs orsnyy uvz ol gur jnl va
gur juvpu lr tb, gura funyy lr oevat qbja zl tenl unvef jvgu fbeebj gb
gur tenir.

43:1 Naq gur snzvar jnf fber va gur ynaq.

43:2 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gurl unq rngra hc gur pbea juvpu gurl
unq oebhtug bhg bs Rtlcg, gurve sngure fnvq hagb gurz, Tb ntnva, ohl
hf n yvggyr sbbq.

43:3 Naq Whqnu fcnxr hagb uvz, fnlvat, Gur zna qvq fbyrzayl cebgrfg
hagb hf, fnlvat, Lr funyy abg frr zl snpr, rkprcg lbhe oebgure or jvgu
lbh.

43:4 Vs gubh jvyg fraq bhe oebgure jvgu hf, jr jvyy tb qbja naq ohl
gurr sbbq: 43:5 Ohg vs gubh jvyg abg fraq uvz, jr jvyy abg tb qbja:
sbe gur zna fnvq hagb hf, Lr funyy abg frr zl snpr, rkprcg lbhe
oebgure or jvgu lbh.

43:6 Naq Vfenry fnvq, Jurersber qrnyg lr fb vyy jvgu zr, nf gb gryy
gur zna jurgure lr unq lrg n oebgure?  43:7 Naq gurl fnvq, Gur zna
nfxrq hf fgenvgyl bs bhe fgngr, naq bs bhe xvaqerq, fnlvat, Vf lbhe
sngure lrg nyvir? unir lr nabgure oebgure? naq jr gbyq uvz nppbeqvat
gb gur grabe bs gurfr jbeqf: pbhyq jr pregnvayl xabj gung ur jbhyq
fnl, Oevat lbhe oebgure qbja?  43:8 Naq Whqnu fnvq hagb Vfenry uvf
sngure, Fraq gur ynq jvgu zr, naq jr jvyy nevfr naq tb; gung jr znl
yvir, naq abg qvr, obgu jr, naq gubh, naq nyfb bhe yvggyr barf.

43:9 V jvyy or fhergl sbe uvz; bs zl unaq funyg gubh erdhver uvz: vs V
oevat uvz abg hagb gurr, naq frg uvz orsber gurr, gura yrg zr orne gur
oynzr sbe rire: 43:10 Sbe rkprcg jr unq yvatrerq, fheryl abj jr unq
erghearq guvf frpbaq gvzr.

43:11 Naq gurve sngure Vfenry fnvq hagb gurz, Vs vg zhfg or fb abj, qb
guvf; gnxr bs gur orfg sehvgf va gur ynaq va lbhe irffryf, naq pneel
qbja gur zna n cerfrag, n yvggyr onyz, naq n yvggyr ubarl, fcvprf, naq
zleeu, ahgf, naq nyzbaqf: 43:12 Naq gnxr qbhoyr zbarl va lbhe unaq;
naq gur zbarl gung jnf oebhtug ntnva va gur zbhgu bs lbhe fnpxf, pneel
vg ntnva va lbhe unaq; crenqiragher vg jnf na birefvtug: 43:13 Gnxr
nyfb lbhe oebgure, naq nevfr, tb ntnva hagb gur zna: 43:14 Naq Tbq
Nyzvtugl tvir lbh zrepl orsber gur zna, gung ur znl fraq njnl lbhe
bgure oebgure, naq Orawnzva. Vs V or orernirq bs zl puvyqera, V nz
orernirq.

43:15 Naq gur zra gbbx gung cerfrag, naq gurl gbbx qbhoyr zbarl va
gurve unaq naq Orawnzva; naq ebfr hc, naq jrag qbja gb Rtlcg, naq
fgbbq orsber Wbfrcu.

43:16 Naq jura Wbfrcu fnj Orawnzva jvgu gurz, ur fnvq gb gur ehyre bs
uvf ubhfr, Oevat gurfr zra ubzr, naq fynl, naq znxr ernql; sbe gurfr
zra funyy qvar jvgu zr ng abba.

43:17 Naq gur zna qvq nf Wbfrcu onqr; naq gur zna oebhtug gur zra vagb
Wbfrcu'f ubhfr.

43:18 Naq gur zra jrer nsenvq, orpnhfr gurl jrer oebhtug vagb Wbfrcu'f
ubhfr; naq gurl fnvq, Orpnhfr bs gur zbarl gung jnf erghearq va bhe
fnpxf ng gur svefg gvzr ner jr oebhtug va; gung ur znl frrx bppnfvba
ntnvafg hf, naq snyy hcba hf, naq gnxr hf sbe obaqzra, naq bhe nffrf.

43:19 Naq gurl pnzr arne gb gur fgrjneq bs Wbfrcu'f ubhfr, naq gurl
pbzzharq jvgu uvz ng gur qbbe bs gur ubhfr, 43:20 Naq fnvq, B fve, jr
pnzr vaqrrq qbja ng gur svefg gvzr gb ohl sbbq: 43:21 Naq vg pnzr gb
cnff, jura jr pnzr gb gur vaa, gung jr bcrarq bhe fnpxf, naq, orubyq,
rirel zna'f zbarl jnf va gur zbhgu bs uvf fnpx, bhe zbarl va shyy
jrvtug: naq jr unir oebhtug vg ntnva va bhe unaq.

43:22 Naq bgure zbarl unir jr oebhtug qbja va bhe unaqf gb ohl sbbq:
jr pnaabg gryy jub chg bhe zbarl va bhe fnpxf.

43:23 Naq ur fnvq, Crnpr or gb lbh, srne abg: lbhe Tbq, naq gur Tbq bs
lbhe sngure, ungu tvira lbh gernfher va lbhe fnpxf: V unq lbhe zbarl.
Naq ur oebhtug Fvzrba bhg hagb gurz.

43:24 Naq gur zna oebhtug gur zra vagb Wbfrcu'f ubhfr, naq tnir gurz
jngre, naq gurl jnfurq gurve srrg; naq ur tnir gurve nffrf cebiraqre.

43:25 Naq gurl znqr ernql gur cerfrag ntnvafg Wbfrcu pnzr ng abba: sbe
gurl urneq gung gurl fubhyq rng oernq gurer.

43:26 Naq jura Wbfrcu pnzr ubzr, gurl oebhtug uvz gur cerfrag juvpu
jnf va gurve unaq vagb gur ubhfr, naq objrq gurzfryirf gb uvz gb gur
rnegu.

43:27 Naq ur nfxrq gurz bs gurve jrysner, naq fnvq, Vf lbhe sngure
jryy, gur byq zna bs jubz lr fcnxr? Vf ur lrg nyvir?  43:28 Naq gurl
nafjrerq, Gul freinag bhe sngure vf va tbbq urnygu, ur vf lrg nyvir.
Naq gurl objrq qbja gurve urnqf, naq znqr borvfnapr.

43:29 Naq ur yvsgrq hc uvf rlrf, naq fnj uvf oebgure Orawnzva, uvf
zbgure'f fba, naq fnvq, Vf guvf lbhe lbhatre oebgure, bs jubz lr fcnxr
hagb zr? Naq ur fnvq, Tbq or tenpvbhf hagb gurr, zl fba.

43:30 Naq Wbfrcu znqr unfgr; sbe uvf objryf qvq lrnea hcba uvf
oebgure: naq ur fbhtug jurer gb jrrc; naq ur ragrerq vagb uvf punzore,
naq jrcg gurer.

43:31 Naq ur jnfurq uvf snpr, naq jrag bhg, naq ersenvarq uvzfrys, naq
fnvq, Frg ba oernq.

43:32 Naq gurl frg ba sbe uvz ol uvzfrys, naq sbe gurz ol gurzfryirf,
naq sbe gur Rtlcgvnaf, juvpu qvq rng jvgu uvz, ol gurzfryirf: orpnhfr
gur Rtlcgvnaf zvtug abg rng oernq jvgu gur Uroerjf; sbe gung vf na
nobzvangvba hagb gur Rtlcgvnaf.

43:33 Naq gurl fng orsber uvz, gur svefgobea nppbeqvat gb uvf
oveguevtug, naq gur lbhatrfg nppbeqvat gb uvf lbhgu: naq gur zra
zneiryyrq bar ng nabgure.

43:34 Naq ur gbbx naq frag zrffrf hagb gurz sebz orsber uvz: ohg
Orawnzva'f zrff jnf svir gvzrf fb zhpu nf nal bs gurve'f. Naq gurl
qenax, naq jrer zreel jvgu uvz.

44:1 Naq ur pbzznaqrq gur fgrjneq bs uvf ubhfr, fnlvat, Svyy gur zra'f
fnpxf jvgu sbbq, nf zhpu nf gurl pna pneel, naq chg rirel zna'f zbarl
va uvf fnpx'f zbhgu.

44:2 Naq chg zl phc, gur fvyire phc, va gur fnpx'f zbhgu bs gur
lbhatrfg, naq uvf pbea zbarl. Naq ur qvq nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq gung
Wbfrcu unq fcbxra.

44:3 Nf fbba nf gur zbeavat jnf yvtug, gur zra jrer frag njnl, gurl
naq gurve nffrf.

44:4 Naq jura gurl jrer tbar bhg bs gur pvgl, naq abg lrg sne bss,
Wbfrcu fnvq hagb uvf fgrjneq, Hc, sbyybj nsgre gur zra; naq jura gubh
qbfg biregnxr gurz, fnl hagb gurz, Jurersber unir lr erjneqrq rivy sbe
tbbq?  44:5 Vf abg guvf vg va juvpu zl ybeq qevaxrgu, naq jurerol
vaqrrq ur qvivargu? lr unir qbar rivy va fb qbvat.

44:6 Naq ur biregbbx gurz, naq ur fcnxr hagb gurz gurfr fnzr jbeqf.

44:7 Naq gurl fnvq hagb uvz, Jurersber fnvgu zl ybeq gurfr jbeqf? Tbq
sbeovq gung gul freinagf fubhyq qb nppbeqvat gb guvf guvat: 44:8
Orubyq, gur zbarl, juvpu jr sbhaq va bhe fnpxf' zbhguf, jr oebhtug
ntnva hagb gurr bhg bs gur ynaq bs Pnanna: ubj gura fubhyq jr fgrny
bhg bs gul ybeq'f ubhfr fvyire be tbyq?  44:9 Jvgu jubzfbrire bs gul
freinagf vg or sbhaq, obgu yrg uvz qvr, naq jr nyfb jvyy or zl ybeq'f
obaqzra.

44:10 Naq ur fnvq, Abj nyfb yrg vg or nppbeqvat hagb lbhe jbeqf: ur
jvgu jubz vg vf sbhaq funyy or zl freinag; naq lr funyy or oynzryrff.

44:11 Gura gurl fcrrqvyl gbbx qbja rirel zna uvf fnpx gb gur tebhaq,
naq bcrarq rirel zna uvf fnpx.

44:12 Naq ur frnepurq, naq ortna ng gur ryqrfg, naq yrsg ng gur
lbhatrfg: naq gur phc jnf sbhaq va Orawnzva'f fnpx.

44:13 Gura gurl erag gurve pybgurf, naq ynqrq rirel zna uvf nff, naq
erghearq gb gur pvgl.

44:14 Naq Whqnu naq uvf oerguera pnzr gb Wbfrcu'f ubhfr; sbe ur jnf
lrg gurer: naq gurl sryy orsber uvz ba gur tebhaq.

44:15 Naq Wbfrcu fnvq hagb gurz, Jung qrrq vf guvf gung lr unir qbar?
jbg lr abg gung fhpu n zna nf V pna pregnvayl qvivar?  44:16 Naq Whqnu
fnvq, Jung funyy jr fnl hagb zl ybeq? jung funyy jr fcrnx?  be ubj
funyy jr pyrne bhefryirf? Tbq ungu sbhaq bhg gur vavdhvgl bs gul
freinagf: orubyq, jr ner zl ybeq'f freinagf, obgu jr, naq ur nyfb jvgu
jubz gur phc vf sbhaq.

44:17 Naq ur fnvq, Tbq sbeovq gung V fubhyq qb fb: ohg gur zna va
jubfr unaq gur phc vf sbhaq, ur funyy or zl freinag; naq nf sbe lbh,
trg lbh hc va crnpr hagb lbhe sngure.

44:18 Gura Whqnu pnzr arne hagb uvz, naq fnvq, Bu zl ybeq, yrg gul
freinag, V cenl gurr, fcrnx n jbeq va zl ybeq'f rnef, naq yrg abg
guvar natre ohea ntnvafg gul freinag: sbe gubh neg rira nf Cunenbu.

44:19 Zl ybeq nfxrq uvf freinagf, fnlvat, Unir lr n sngure, be n
oebgure?  44:20 Naq jr fnvq hagb zl ybeq, Jr unir n sngure, na byq
zna, naq n puvyq bs uvf byq ntr, n yvggyr bar; naq uvf oebgure vf
qrnq, naq ur nybar vf yrsg bs uvf zbgure, naq uvf sngure ybirgu uvz.

44:21 Naq gubh fnvqfg hagb gul freinagf, Oevat uvz qbja hagb zr, gung
V znl frg zvar rlrf hcba uvz.

44:22 Naq jr fnvq hagb zl ybeq, Gur ynq pnaabg yrnir uvf sngure: sbe
vs ur fubhyq yrnir uvf sngure, uvf sngure jbhyq qvr.

44:23 Naq gubh fnvqfg hagb gul freinagf, Rkprcg lbhe lbhatrfg oebgure
pbzr qbja jvgu lbh, lr funyy frr zl snpr ab zber.

44:24 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff jura jr pnzr hc hagb gul freinag zl sngure,
jr gbyq uvz gur jbeqf bs zl ybeq.

44:25 Naq bhe sngure fnvq, Tb ntnva, naq ohl hf n yvggyr sbbq.

44:26 Naq jr fnvq, Jr pnaabg tb qbja: vs bhe lbhatrfg oebgure or jvgu
hf, gura jvyy jr tb qbja: sbe jr znl abg frr gur zna'f snpr, rkprcg
bhe lbhatrfg oebgure or jvgu hf.

44:27 Naq gul freinag zl sngure fnvq hagb hf, Lr xabj gung zl jvsr
oner zr gjb fbaf: 44:28 Naq gur bar jrag bhg sebz zr, naq V fnvq,
Fheryl ur vf gbea va cvrprf; naq V fnj uvz abg fvapr: 44:29 Naq vs lr
gnxr guvf nyfb sebz zr, naq zvfpuvrs orsnyy uvz, lr funyy oevat qbja
zl tenl unvef jvgu fbeebj gb gur tenir.

44:30 Abj gurersber jura V pbzr gb gul freinag zl sngure, naq gur ynq
or abg jvgu hf; frrvat gung uvf yvsr vf obhaq hc va gur ynq'f yvsr;
44:31 Vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, jura ur frrgu gung gur ynq vf abg jvgu
hf, gung ur jvyy qvr: naq gul freinagf funyy oevat qbja gur tenl unvef
bs gul freinag bhe sngure jvgu fbeebj gb gur tenir.

44:32 Sbe gul freinag orpnzr fhergl sbe gur ynq hagb zl sngure,
fnlvat, Vs V oevat uvz abg hagb gurr, gura V funyy orne gur oynzr gb
zl sngure sbe rire.

44:33 Abj gurersber, V cenl gurr, yrg gul freinag novqr vafgrnq bs gur
ynq n obaqzna gb zl ybeq; naq yrg gur ynq tb hc jvgu uvf oerguera.

44:34 Sbe ubj funyy V tb hc gb zl sngure, naq gur ynq or abg jvgu zr?
yrfg crenqiragher V frr gur rivy gung funyy pbzr ba zl sngure.

45:1 Gura Wbfrcu pbhyq abg ersenva uvzfrys orsber nyy gurz gung fgbbq
ol uvz; naq ur pevrq, Pnhfr rirel zna gb tb bhg sebz zr. Naq gurer
fgbbq ab zna jvgu uvz, juvyr Wbfrcu znqr uvzfrys xabja hagb uvf
oerguera.

45:2 Naq ur jrcg nybhq: naq gur Rtlcgvnaf naq gur ubhfr bs Cunenbu
urneq.

45:3 Naq Wbfrcu fnvq hagb uvf oerguera, V nz Wbfrcu; qbgu zl sngure
lrg yvir? Naq uvf oerguera pbhyq abg nafjre uvz; sbe gurl jrer
gebhoyrq ng uvf cerfrapr.

45:4 Naq Wbfrcu fnvq hagb uvf oerguera, Pbzr arne gb zr, V cenl lbh.
Naq gurl pnzr arne. Naq ur fnvq, V nz Wbfrcu lbhe oebgure, jubz lr
fbyq vagb Rtlcg.

45:5 Abj gurersber or abg tevrirq, abe natel jvgu lbhefryirf, gung lr
fbyq zr uvgure: sbe Tbq qvq fraq zr orsber lbh gb cerfreir yvsr.

45:6 Sbe gurfr gjb lrnef ungu gur snzvar orra va gur ynaq: naq lrg
gurer ner svir lrnef, va gur juvpu gurer funyy arvgure or rnevat abe
uneirfg.

45:7 Naq Tbq frag zr orsber lbh gb cerfreir lbh n cbfgrevgl va gur
rnegu, naq gb fnir lbhe yvirf ol n terng qryvirenapr.

45:8 Fb abj vg jnf abg lbh gung frag zr uvgure, ohg Tbq: naq ur ungu
znqr zr n sngure gb Cunenbu, naq ybeq bs nyy uvf ubhfr, naq n ehyre
guebhtubhg nyy gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

45:9 Unfgr lr, naq tb hc gb zl sngure, naq fnl hagb uvz, Guhf fnvgu
gul fba Wbfrcu, Tbq ungu znqr zr ybeq bs nyy Rtlcg: pbzr qbja hagb zr,
gneel abg: 45:10 Naq gubh funyg qjryy va gur ynaq bs Tbfura, naq gubh
funyg or arne hagb zr, gubh, naq gul puvyqera, naq gul puvyqera'f
puvyqera, naq gul sybpxf, naq gul ureqf, naq nyy gung gubh unfg: 45:11
Naq gurer jvyy V abhevfu gurr; sbe lrg gurer ner svir lrnef bs snzvar;
yrfg gubh, naq gul ubhfrubyq, naq nyy gung gubh unfg, pbzr gb cbiregl.

45:12 Naq, orubyq, lbhe rlrf frr, naq gur rlrf bs zl oebgure Orawnzva,
gung vg vf zl zbhgu gung fcrnxrgu hagb lbh.

45:13 Naq lr funyy gryy zl sngure bs nyy zl tybel va Rtlcg, naq bs nyy
gung lr unir frra; naq lr funyy unfgr naq oevat qbja zl sngure uvgure.

45:14 Naq ur sryy hcba uvf oebgure Orawnzva'f arpx, naq jrcg; naq
Orawnzva jrcg hcba uvf arpx.

45:15 Zberbire ur xvffrq nyy uvf oerguera, naq jrcg hcba gurz: naq
nsgre gung uvf oerguera gnyxrq jvgu uvz.

45:16 Naq gur snzr gurerbs jnf urneq va Cunenbu'f ubhfr, fnlvat,
Wbfrcu'f oerguera ner pbzr: naq vg cyrnfrq Cunenbu jryy, naq uvf
freinagf.

45:17 Naq Cunenbu fnvq hagb Wbfrcu, Fnl hagb gul oerguera, Guvf qb lr;
ynqr lbhe ornfgf, naq tb, trg lbh hagb gur ynaq bs Pnanna; 45:18 Naq
gnxr lbhe sngure naq lbhe ubhfrubyqf, naq pbzr hagb zr: naq V jvyy
tvir lbh gur tbbq bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, naq lr funyy rng gur sng bs
gur ynaq.

45:19 Abj gubh neg pbzznaqrq, guvf qb lr; gnxr lbh jntbaf bhg bs gur
ynaq bs Rtlcg sbe lbhe yvggyr barf, naq sbe lbhe jvirf, naq oevat lbhe
sngure, naq pbzr.

45:20 Nyfb ertneq abg lbhe fghss; sbe gur tbbq bs nyy gur ynaq bs
Rtlcg vf lbhe'f.

45:21 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq fb: naq Wbfrcu tnir gurz jntbaf,
nppbeqvat gb gur pbzznaqzrag bs Cunenbu, naq tnir gurz cebivfvba sbe
gur jnl.

45:22 Gb nyy bs gurz ur tnir rnpu zna punatrf bs envzrag; ohg gb
Orawnzva ur tnir guerr uhaqerq cvrprf bs fvyire, naq svir punatrf bs
envzrag.

45:23 Naq gb uvf sngure ur frag nsgre guvf znaare; gra nffrf ynqra
jvgu gur tbbq guvatf bs Rtlcg, naq gra fur nffrf ynqra jvgu pbea naq
oernq naq zrng sbe uvf sngure ol gur jnl.

45:24 Fb ur frag uvf oerguera njnl, naq gurl qrcnegrq: naq ur fnvq
hagb gurz, Frr gung lr snyy abg bhg ol gur jnl.

45:25 Naq gurl jrag hc bhg bs Rtlcg, naq pnzr vagb gur ynaq bs Pnanna
hagb Wnpbo gurve sngure, 45:26 Naq gbyq uvz, fnlvat, Wbfrcu vf lrg
nyvir, naq ur vf tbireabe bire nyy gur ynaq bs Rtlcg. Naq Wnpbo'f
urneg snvagrq, sbe ur oryvrirq gurz abg.

45:27 Naq gurl gbyq uvz nyy gur jbeqf bs Wbfrcu, juvpu ur unq fnvq
hagb gurz: naq jura ur fnj gur jntbaf juvpu Wbfrcu unq frag gb pneel
uvz, gur fcvevg bs Wnpbo gurve sngure erivirq: 45:28 Naq Vfenry fnvq,
Vg vf rabhtu; Wbfrcu zl fba vf lrg nyvir: V jvyy tb naq frr uvz orsber
V qvr.

46:1 Naq Vfenry gbbx uvf wbhearl jvgu nyy gung ur unq, naq pnzr gb
Orrefuron, naq bssrerq fnpevsvprf hagb gur Tbq bs uvf sngure Vfnnp.

46:2 Naq Tbq fcnxr hagb Vfenry va gur ivfvbaf bs gur avtug, naq fnvq,
Wnpbo, Wnpbo. Naq ur fnvq, Urer nz V.

46:3 Naq ur fnvq, V nz Tbq, gur Tbq bs gul sngure: srne abg gb tb qbja
vagb Rtlcg; sbe V jvyy gurer znxr bs gurr n terng angvba: 46:4 V jvyy
tb qbja jvgu gurr vagb Rtlcg; naq V jvyy nyfb fheryl oevat gurr hc
ntnva: naq Wbfrcu funyy chg uvf unaq hcba guvar rlrf.

46:5 Naq Wnpbo ebfr hc sebz Orrefuron: naq gur fbaf bs Vfenry pneevrq
Wnpbo gurve sngure, naq gurve yvggyr barf, naq gurve jvirf, va gur
jntbaf juvpu Cunenbu unq frag gb pneel uvz.

46:6 Naq gurl gbbx gurve pnggyr, naq gurve tbbqf, juvpu gurl unq
tbggra va gur ynaq bs Pnanna, naq pnzr vagb Rtlcg, Wnpbo, naq nyy uvf
frrq jvgu uvz: 46:7 Uvf fbaf, naq uvf fbaf' fbaf jvgu uvz, uvf
qnhtugref, naq uvf fbaf' qnhtugref, naq nyy uvf frrq oebhtug ur jvgu
uvz vagb Rtlcg.

46:8 Naq gurfr ner gur anzrf bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, juvpu pnzr
vagb Rtlcg, Wnpbo naq uvf fbaf: Erhora, Wnpbo'f svefgobea.

46:9 Naq gur fbaf bs Erhora; Unabpu, naq Cunyyh, naq Urmeba, naq
Pnezv.

46:10 Naq gur fbaf bs Fvzrba; Wrzhry, naq Wnzva, naq Bunq, naq Wnpuva,
naq Mbune, naq Funhy gur fba bs n Pnannavgvfu jbzna.

46:11 Naq gur fbaf bs Yriv; Trefuba, Xbungu, naq Zrenev.

46:12 Naq gur fbaf bs Whqnu; Re, naq Bana, naq Furynu, naq Cunerm, naq
Mnenu: ohg Re naq Bana qvrq va gur ynaq bs Pnanna. Naq gur fbaf bs
Cunerm jrer Urmeba naq Unzhy.

46:13 Naq gur fbaf bs Vffnpune; Gbyn, naq Cuhinu, naq Wbo, naq
Fuvzeba.

46:14 Naq gur fbaf bs Mrohyha; Frerq, naq Ryba, naq Wnuyrry.

46:15 Gurfr or gur fbaf bs Yrnu, juvpu fur oner hagb Wnpbo va
Cnqnanenz, jvgu uvf qnhtugre Qvanu: nyy gur fbhyf bs uvf fbaf naq uvf
qnhtugref jrer guvegl naq guerr.

46:16 Naq gur fbaf bs Tnq; Mvcuvba, naq Unttv, Fuhav, naq Rmoba, Rev,
naq Nebqv, naq Neryv.

46:17 Naq gur fbaf bs Nfure; Wvzanu, naq Vfuhnu, naq Vfhv, naq Orevnu,
naq Frenu gurve fvfgre: naq gur fbaf bs Orevnu; Urore, naq Znypuvry.

46:18 Gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Mvycnu, jubz Ynona tnir gb Yrnu uvf
qnhtugre, naq gurfr fur oner hagb Wnpbo, rira fvkgrra fbhyf.

46:19 Gur fbaf bs Enpury Wnpbo'f jvsr; Wbfrcu, naq Orawnzva.

46:20 Naq hagb Wbfrcu va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg jrer obea Znanffru naq
Rcuenvz, juvpu Nfrangu gur qnhtugre bs Cbgvcurenu cevrfg bs Ba oner
hagb uvz.

46:21 Naq gur fbaf bs Orawnzva jrer Orynu, naq Orpure, naq Nfuory,
Tren, naq Annzna, Ruv, naq Ebfu, Zhccvz, naq Uhccvz, naq Neq.

46:22 Gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Enpury, juvpu jrer obea gb Wnpbo: nyy gur
fbhyf jrer sbhegrra.

46:23 Naq gur fbaf bs Qna; Uhfuvz.

46:24 Naq gur fbaf bs Ancugnyv; Wnumrry, naq Thav, naq Wrmre, naq
Fuvyyrz.

46:25 Gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Ovyunu, juvpu Ynona tnir hagb Enpury uvf
qnhtugre, naq fur oner gurfr hagb Wnpbo: nyy gur fbhyf jrer frira.

46:26 Nyy gur fbhyf gung pnzr jvgu Wnpbo vagb Rtlcg, juvpu pnzr bhg bs
uvf ybvaf, orfvqrf Wnpbo'f fbaf' jvirf, nyy gur fbhyf jrer guerrfpber
naq fvk; 46:27 Naq gur fbaf bs Wbfrcu, juvpu jrer obea uvz va Rtlcg,
jrer gjb fbhyf: nyy gur fbhyf bs gur ubhfr bs Wnpbo, juvpu pnzr vagb
Rtlcg, jrer guerrfpber naq gra.

46:28 Naq ur frag Whqnu orsber uvz hagb Wbfrcu, gb qverpg uvf snpr
hagb Tbfura; naq gurl pnzr vagb gur ynaq bs Tbfura.

46:29 Naq Wbfrcu znqr ernql uvf punevbg, naq jrag hc gb zrrg Vfenry
uvf sngure, gb Tbfura, naq cerfragrq uvzfrys hagb uvz; naq ur sryy ba
uvf arpx, naq jrcg ba uvf arpx n tbbq juvyr.

46:30 Naq Vfenry fnvq hagb Wbfrcu, Abj yrg zr qvr, fvapr V unir frra
gul snpr, orpnhfr gubh neg lrg nyvir.

46:31 Naq Wbfrcu fnvq hagb uvf oerguera, naq hagb uvf sngure'f ubhfr,
V jvyy tb hc, naq furj Cunenbu, naq fnl hagb uvz, Zl oerguera, naq zl
sngure'f ubhfr, juvpu jrer va gur ynaq bs Pnanna, ner pbzr hagb zr;
46:32 Naq gur zra ner furcureqf, sbe gurve genqr ungu orra gb srrq
pnggyr; naq gurl unir oebhtug gurve sybpxf, naq gurve ureqf, naq nyy
gung gurl unir.

46:33 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, jura Cunenbu funyy pnyy lbh, naq
funyy fnl, Jung vf lbhe bpphcngvba?  46:34 Gung lr funyy fnl, Gul
freinagf' genqr ungu orra nobhg pnggyr sebz bhe lbhgu rira hagvy abj,
obgu jr, naq nyfb bhe snguref: gung lr znl qjryy va gur ynaq bs
Tbfura; sbe rirel furcureq vf na nobzvangvba hagb gur Rtlcgvnaf.

47:1 Gura Wbfrcu pnzr naq gbyq Cunenbu, naq fnvq, Zl sngure naq zl
oerguera, naq gurve sybpxf, naq gurve ureqf, naq nyy gung gurl unir,
ner pbzr bhg bs gur ynaq bs Pnanna; naq, orubyq, gurl ner va gur ynaq
bs Tbfura.

47:2 Naq ur gbbx fbzr bs uvf oerguera, rira svir zra, naq cerfragrq
gurz hagb Cunenbu.

47:3 Naq Cunenbu fnvq hagb uvf oerguera, Jung vf lbhe bpphcngvba? Naq
gurl fnvq hagb Cunenbu, Gul freinagf ner furcureqf, obgu jr, naq nyfb
bhe snguref.

47:4 Gurl fnvq zberire hagb Cunenbu, Sbe gb fbwbhea va gur ynaq ner jr
pbzr; sbe gul freinagf unir ab cnfgher sbe gurve sybpxf; sbe gur
snzvar vf fber va gur ynaq bs Pnanna: abj gurersber, jr cenl gurr, yrg
gul freinagf qjryy va gur ynaq bs Tbfura.

47:5 Naq Cunenbu fcnxr hagb Wbfrcu, fnlvat, Gul sngure naq gul
oerguera ner pbzr hagb gurr: 47:6 Gur ynaq bs Rtlcg vf orsber gurr; va
gur orfg bs gur ynaq znxr gul sngure naq oerguera gb qjryy; va gur
ynaq bs Tbfura yrg gurz qjryy: naq vs gubh xabjrfg nal zra bs npgvivgl
nzbat gurz, gura znxr gurz ehyref bire zl pnggyr.

47:7 Naq Wbfrcu oebhtug va Wnpbo uvf sngure, naq frg uvz orsber
Cunenbu: naq Wnpbo oyrffrq Cunenbu.

47:8 Naq Cunenbu fnvq hagb Wnpbo, Ubj byq neg gubh?  47:9 Naq Wnpbo
fnvq hagb Cunenbu, Gur qnlf bs gur lrnef bs zl cvytevzntr ner na
uhaqerq naq guvegl lrnef: srj naq rivy unir gur qnlf bs gur lrnef bs
zl yvsr orra, naq unir abg nggnvarq hagb gur qnlf bs gur lrnef bs gur
yvsr bs zl snguref va gur qnlf bs gurve cvytevzntr.

47:10 Naq Wnpbo oyrffrq Cunenbu, naq jrag bhg sebz orsber Cunenbu.

47:11 Naq Wbfrcu cynprq uvf sngure naq uvf oerguera, naq tnir gurz n
cbffrffvba va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, va gur orfg bs gur ynaq, va gur ynaq
bs Enzrfrf, nf Cunenbu unq pbzznaqrq.

47:12 Naq Wbfrcu abhevfurq uvf sngure, naq uvf oerguera, naq nyy uvf
sngure'f ubhfrubyq, jvgu oernq, nppbeqvat gb gurve snzvyvrf.

47:13 Naq gurer jnf ab oernq va nyy gur ynaq; sbe gur snzvar jnf irel
fber, fb gung gur ynaq bs Rtlcg naq nyy gur ynaq bs Pnanna snvagrq ol
ernfba bs gur snzvar.

47:14 Naq Wbfrcu tngurerq hc nyy gur zbarl gung jnf sbhaq va gur ynaq
bs Rtlcg, naq va gur ynaq bs Pnanna, sbe gur pbea juvpu gurl obhtug:
naq Wbfrcu oebhtug gur zbarl vagb Cunenbu'f ubhfr.

47:15 Naq jura zbarl snvyrq va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, naq va gur ynaq bs
Pnanna, nyy gur Rtlcgvnaf pnzr hagb Wbfrcu, naq fnvq, Tvir hf oernq:
sbe jul fubhyq jr qvr va gul cerfrapr? sbe gur zbarl snvyrgu.

47:16 Naq Wbfrcu fnvq, Tvir lbhe pnggyr; naq V jvyy tvir lbh sbe lbhe
pnggyr, vs zbarl snvy.

47:17 Naq gurl oebhtug gurve pnggyr hagb Wbfrcu: naq Wbfrcu tnir gurz
oernq va rkpunatr sbe ubefrf, naq sbe gur sybpxf, naq sbe gur pnggyr
bs gur ureqf, naq sbe gur nffrf: naq ur srq gurz jvgu oernq sbe nyy
gurve pnggyr sbe gung lrne.

47:18 Jura gung lrne jnf raqrq, gurl pnzr hagb uvz gur frpbaq lrne,
naq fnvq hagb uvz, Jr jvyy abg uvqr vg sebz zl ybeq, ubj gung bhe
zbarl vf fcrag; zl ybeq nyfb ungu bhe ureqf bs pnggyr; gurer vf abg
bhtug yrsg va gur fvtug bs zl ybeq, ohg bhe obqvrf, naq bhe ynaqf:
47:19 Jurersber funyy jr qvr orsber guvar rlrf, obgu jr naq bhe ynaq?
ohl hf naq bhe ynaq sbe oernq, naq jr naq bhe ynaq jvyy or freinagf
hagb Cunenbu: naq tvir hf frrq, gung jr znl yvir, naq abg qvr, gung
gur ynaq or abg qrfbyngr.

47:20 Naq Wbfrcu obhtug nyy gur ynaq bs Rtlcg sbe Cunenbu; sbe gur
Rtlcgvnaf fbyq rirel zna uvf svryq, orpnhfr gur snzvar cerinvyrq bire
gurz: fb gur ynaq orpnzr Cunenbu'f.

47:21 Naq nf sbe gur crbcyr, ur erzbirq gurz gb pvgvrf sebz bar raq bs
gur obeqref bs Rtlcg rira gb gur bgure raq gurerbs.

47:22 Bayl gur ynaq bs gur cevrfgf obhtug ur abg; sbe gur cevrfgf unq
n cbegvba nffvtarq gurz bs Cunenbu, naq qvq rng gurve cbegvba juvpu
Cunenbu tnir gurz: jurersber gurl fbyq abg gurve ynaqf.

47:23 Gura Wbfrcu fnvq hagb gur crbcyr, Orubyq, V unir obhtug lbh guvf
qnl naq lbhe ynaq sbe Cunenbu: yb, urer vf frrq sbe lbh, naq lr funyy
fbj gur ynaq.

47:24 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff va gur vapernfr, gung lr funyy tvir
gur svsgu cneg hagb Cunenbu, naq sbhe cnegf funyy or lbhe bja, sbe
frrq bs gur svryq, naq sbe lbhe sbbq, naq sbe gurz bs lbhe ubhfrubyqf,
naq sbe sbbq sbe lbhe yvggyr barf.

47:25 Naq gurl fnvq, Gubh unfg fnirq bhe yvirf: yrg hf svaq tenpr va
gur fvtug bs zl ybeq, naq jr jvyy or Cunenbu'f freinagf.

47:26 Naq Wbfrcu znqr vg n ynj bire gur ynaq bs Rtlcg hagb guvf qnl,
gung Cunenbu fubhyq unir gur svsgu cneg, rkprcg gur ynaq bs gur
cevrfgf bayl, juvpu orpnzr abg Cunenbu'f.

47:27 Naq Vfenry qjryg va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, va gur pbhagel bs Tbfura;
naq gurl unq cbffrffvbaf gurerva, naq terj, naq zhygvcyvrq
rkprrqvatyl.

47:28 Naq Wnpbo yvirq va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg friragrra lrnef: fb gur
jubyr ntr bs Wnpbo jnf na uhaqerq sbegl naq frira lrnef.

47:29 Naq gur gvzr qerj avtu gung Vfenry zhfg qvr: naq ur pnyyrq uvf
fba Wbfrcu, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Vs abj V unir sbhaq tenpr va gul fvtug,
chg, V cenl gurr, gul unaq haqre zl guvtu, naq qrny xvaqyl naq gehyl
jvgu zr; ohel zr abg, V cenl gurr, va Rtlcg: 47:30 Ohg V jvyy yvr jvgu
zl snguref, naq gubh funyg pneel zr bhg bs Rtlcg, naq ohel zr va gurve
ohelvatcynpr. Naq ur fnvq, V jvyy qb nf gubh unfg fnvq.

47:31 Naq ur fnvq, Fjrne hagb zr. Naq ur fjner hagb uvz. Naq Vfenry
objrq uvzfrys hcba gur orq'f urnq.

48:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre gurfr guvatf, gung bar gbyq Wbfrcu,
Orubyq, gul sngure vf fvpx: naq ur gbbx jvgu uvz uvf gjb fbaf,
Znanffru naq Rcuenvz.

48:2 Naq bar gbyq Wnpbo, naq fnvq, Orubyq, gul fba Wbfrcu pbzrgu hagb
gurr: naq Vfenry fgeratgurarq uvzfrys, naq fng hcba gur orq.

48:3 Naq Wnpbo fnvq hagb Wbfrcu, Tbq Nyzvtugl nccrnerq hagb zr ng Yhm
va gur ynaq bs Pnanna, naq oyrffrq zr, 48:4 Naq fnvq hagb zr, Orubyq,
V jvyy znxr gurr sehvgshy, naq zhygvcyl gurr, naq V jvyy znxr bs gurr
n zhygvghqr bs crbcyr; naq jvyy tvir guvf ynaq gb gul frrq nsgre gurr
sbe na rireynfgvat cbffrffvba.

48:5 Naq abj gul gjb fbaf, Rcuenvz naq Znanffru, juvpu jrer obea hagb
gurr va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg orsber V pnzr hagb gurr vagb Rtlcg, ner
zvar; nf Erhora naq Fvzrba, gurl funyy or zvar.

48:6 Naq gul vffhr, juvpu gubh ortrggrfg nsgre gurz, funyy or guvar,
naq funyy or pnyyrq nsgre gur anzr bs gurve oerguera va gurve
vaurevgnapr.

48:7 Naq nf sbe zr, jura V pnzr sebz Cnqna, Enpury qvrq ol zr va gur
ynaq bs Pnanna va gur jnl, jura lrg gurer jnf ohg n yvggyr jnl gb pbzr
hagb Rcuengu: naq V ohevrq ure gurer va gur jnl bs Rcuengu; gur fnzr
vf Orguyrurz.

48:8 Naq Vfenry oruryq Wbfrcu'f fbaf, naq fnvq, Jub ner gurfr?  48:9
Naq Wbfrcu fnvq hagb uvf sngure, Gurl ner zl fbaf, jubz Tbq ungu tvira
zr va guvf cynpr. Naq ur fnvq, Oevat gurz, V cenl gurr, hagb zr, naq V
jvyy oyrff gurz.

48:10 Abj gur rlrf bs Vfenry jrer qvz sbe ntr, fb gung ur pbhyq abg
frr.

Naq ur oebhtug gurz arne hagb uvz; naq ur xvffrq gurz, naq rzoenprq
gurz.

48:11 Naq Vfenry fnvq hagb Wbfrcu, V unq abg gubhtug gb frr gul snpr:
naq, yb, Tbq ungu furjrq zr nyfb gul frrq.

48:12 Naq Wbfrcu oebhtug gurz bhg sebz orgjrra uvf xarrf, naq ur objrq
uvzfrys jvgu uvf snpr gb gur rnegu.

48:13 Naq Wbfrcu gbbx gurz obgu, Rcuenvz va uvf evtug unaq gbjneq
Vfenry'f yrsg unaq, naq Znanffru va uvf yrsg unaq gbjneq Vfenry'f
evtug unaq, naq oebhtug gurz arne hagb uvz.

48:14 Naq Vfenry fgergpurq bhg uvf evtug unaq, naq ynvq vg hcba
Rcuenvz'f urnq, jub jnf gur lbhatre, naq uvf yrsg unaq hcba Znanffru'f
urnq, thvqvat uvf unaqf jvggvatyl; sbe Znanffru jnf gur svefgobea.

48:15 Naq ur oyrffrq Wbfrcu, naq fnvq, Tbq, orsber jubz zl snguref
Noenunz naq Vfnnp qvq jnyx, gur Tbq juvpu srq zr nyy zl yvsr ybat hagb
guvf qnl, 48:16 Gur Natry juvpu erqrrzrq zr sebz nyy rivy, oyrff gur
ynqf; naq yrg zl anzr or anzrq ba gurz, naq gur anzr bs zl snguref
Noenunz naq Vfnnp; naq yrg gurz tebj vagb n zhygvghqr va gur zvqfg bs
gur rnegu.

48:17 Naq jura Wbfrcu fnj gung uvf sngure ynvq uvf evtug unaq hcba gur
urnq bs Rcuenvz, vg qvfcyrnfrq uvz: naq ur uryq hc uvf sngure'f unaq,
gb erzbir vg sebz Rcuenvz'f urnq hagb Znanffru'f urnq.

48:18 Naq Wbfrcu fnvq hagb uvf sngure, Abg fb, zl sngure: sbe guvf vf
gur svefgobea; chg gul evtug unaq hcba uvf urnq.

48:19 Naq uvf sngure ershfrq, naq fnvq, V xabj vg, zl fba, V xabj vg:
ur nyfb funyy orpbzr n crbcyr, naq ur nyfb funyy or terng: ohg gehyl
uvf lbhatre oebgure funyy or terngre guna ur, naq uvf frrq funyy
orpbzr n zhygvghqr bs angvbaf.

48:20 Naq ur oyrffrq gurz gung qnl, fnlvat, Va gurr funyy Vfenry
oyrff, fnlvat, Tbq znxr gurr nf Rcuenvz naq nf Znanffru: naq ur frg
Rcuenvz orsber Znanffru.

48:21 Naq Vfenry fnvq hagb Wbfrcu, Orubyq, V qvr: ohg Tbq funyy or
jvgu lbh, naq oevat lbh ntnva hagb gur ynaq bs lbhe snguref.

48:22 Zberbire V unir tvira gb gurr bar cbegvba nobir gul oerguera,
juvpu V gbbx bhg bs gur unaq bs gur Nzbevgr jvgu zl fjbeq naq jvgu zl
obj.

49:1 Naq Wnpbo pnyyrq hagb uvf fbaf, naq fnvq, Tngure lbhefryirf
gbtrgure, gung V znl gryy lbh gung juvpu funyy orsnyy lbh va gur ynfg
qnlf.

49:2 Tngure lbhefryirf gbtrgure, naq urne, lr fbaf bs Wnpbo; naq
urnexra hagb Vfenry lbhe sngure.

49:3 Erhora, gubh neg zl svefgobea, zl zvtug, naq gur ortvaavat bs zl
fgeratgu, gur rkpryyrapl bs qvtavgl, naq gur rkpryyrapl bs cbjre: 49:4
Hafgnoyr nf jngre, gubh funyg abg rkpry; orpnhfr gubh jragrfg hc gb
gul sngure'f orq; gura qrsvyrqfg gubh vg: ur jrag hc gb zl pbhpu.

49:5 Fvzrba naq Yriv ner oerguera; vafgehzragf bs pehrygl ner va gurve
unovgngvbaf.

49:6 B zl fbhy, pbzr abg gubh vagb gurve frperg; hagb gurve nffrzoyl,
zvar ubabhe, or abg gubh havgrq: sbe va gurve natre gurl fyrj n zna,
naq va gurve frysjvyy gurl qvttrq qbja n jnyy.

49:7 Phefrq or gurve natre, sbe vg jnf svrepr; naq gurve jengu, sbe vg
jnf pehry: V jvyy qvivqr gurz va Wnpbo, naq fpnggre gurz va Vfenry.

49:8 Whqnu, gubh neg ur jubz gul oerguera funyy cenvfr: gul unaq funyy
or va gur arpx bs guvar rarzvrf; gul sngure'f puvyqera funyy obj qbja
orsber gurr.

49:9 Whqnu vf n yvba'f juryc: sebz gur cerl, zl fba, gubh neg tbar hc:
ur fgbbcrq qbja, ur pbhpurq nf n yvba, naq nf na byq yvba; jub funyy
ebhfr uvz hc?  49:10 Gur fprcger funyy abg qrcneg sebz Whqnu, abe n
ynjtvire sebz orgjrra uvf srrg, hagvy Fuvybu pbzr; naq hagb uvz funyy
gur tngurevat bs gur crbcyr or.

49:11 Ovaqvat uvf sbny hagb gur ivar, naq uvf nff'f pbyg hagb gur
pubvpr ivar; ur jnfurq uvf tnezragf va jvar, naq uvf pybgurf va gur
oybbq bs tencrf: 49:12 Uvf rlrf funyy or erq jvgu jvar, naq uvf grrgu
juvgr jvgu zvyx.

49:13 Mrohyha funyy qjryy ng gur unira bs gur frn; naq ur funyy or sbe
na unira bs fuvcf; naq uvf obeqre funyy or hagb Mvqba.

49:14 Vffnpune vf n fgebat nff pbhpuvat qbja orgjrra gjb oheqraf:
49:15 Naq ur fnj gung erfg jnf tbbq, naq gur ynaq gung vg jnf
cyrnfnag; naq objrq uvf fubhyqre gb orne, naq orpnzr n freinag hagb
gevohgr.

49:16 Qna funyy whqtr uvf crbcyr, nf bar bs gur gevorf bs Vfenry.

49:17 Qna funyy or n frecrag ol gur jnl, na nqqre va gur cngu, gung
ovgrgu gur ubefr urryf, fb gung uvf evqre funyy snyy onpxjneq.

49:18 V unir jnvgrq sbe gul fnyingvba, B YBEQ.

49:19 Tnq, n gebbc funyy birepbzr uvz: ohg ur funyy birepbzr ng gur
ynfg.

49:20 Bhg bs Nfure uvf oernq funyy or sng, naq ur funyy lvryq eblny
qnvagvrf.

49:21 Ancugnyv vf n uvaq yrg ybbfr: ur tvirgu tbbqyl jbeqf.

49:22 Wbfrcu vf n sehvgshy obhtu, rira n sehvgshy obhtu ol n jryy;
jubfr oenapurf eha bire gur jnyy: 49:23 Gur nepuref unir fberyl
tevrirq uvz, naq fubg ng uvz, naq ungrq uvz: 49:24 Ohg uvf obj nobqr
va fgeratgu, naq gur nezf bs uvf unaqf jrer znqr fgebat ol gur unaqf
bs gur zvtugl Tbq bs Wnpbo; (sebz gurapr vf gur furcureq, gur fgbar bs
Vfenry:) 49:25 Rira ol gur Tbq bs gul sngure, jub funyy uryc gurr; naq
ol gur Nyzvtugl, jub funyy oyrff gurr jvgu oyrffvatf bs urnira nobir,
oyrffvatf bs gur qrrc gung yvrgu haqre, oyrffvatf bs gur oernfgf, naq
bs gur jbzo: 49:26 Gur oyrffvatf bs gul sngure unir cerinvyrq nobir
gur oyrffvatf bs zl cebtravgbef hagb gur hgzbfg obhaq bs gur
rireynfgvat uvyyf: gurl funyy or ba gur urnq bs Wbfrcu, naq ba gur
pebja bs gur urnq bs uvz gung jnf frcnengr sebz uvf oerguera.

49:27 Orawnzva funyy eniva nf n jbys: va gur zbeavat ur funyy qribhe
gur cerl, naq ng avtug ur funyy qvivqr gur fcbvy.

49:28 Nyy gurfr ner gur gjryir gevorf bs Vfenry: naq guvf vf vg gung
gurve sngure fcnxr hagb gurz, naq oyrffrq gurz; rirel bar nppbeqvat gb
uvf oyrffvat ur oyrffrq gurz.

49:29 Naq ur punetrq gurz, naq fnvq hagb gurz, V nz gb or tngurerq
hagb zl crbcyr: ohel zr jvgu zl snguref va gur pnir gung vf va gur
svryq bs Rcueba gur Uvggvgr, 49:30 Va gur pnir gung vf va gur svryq bs
Znpucrynu, juvpu vf orsber Znzer, va gur ynaq bs Pnanna, juvpu Noenunz
obhtug jvgu gur svryq bs Rcueba gur Uvggvgr sbe n cbffrffvba bs n
ohelvatcynpr.

49:31 Gurer gurl ohevrq Noenunz naq Fnenu uvf jvsr; gurer gurl ohevrq
Vfnnp naq Erorxnu uvf jvsr; naq gurer V ohevrq Yrnu.

49:32 Gur chepunfr bs gur svryq naq bs gur pnir gung vf gurerva jnf
sebz gur puvyqera bs Urgu.

49:33 Naq jura Wnpbo unq znqr na raq bs pbzznaqvat uvf fbaf, ur
tngurerq hc uvf srrg vagb gur orq, naq lvryqrq hc gur tubfg, naq jnf
tngurerq hagb uvf crbcyr.

50:1 Naq Wbfrcu sryy hcba uvf sngure'f snpr, naq jrcg hcba uvz, naq
xvffrq uvz.

50:2 Naq Wbfrcu pbzznaqrq uvf freinagf gur culfvpvnaf gb rzonyz uvf
sngure: naq gur culfvpvnaf rzonyzrq Vfenry.

50:3 Naq sbegl qnlf jrer shysvyyrq sbe uvz; sbe fb ner shysvyyrq gur
qnlf bs gubfr juvpu ner rzonyzrq: naq gur Rtlcgvnaf zbhearq sbe uvz
guerrfpber naq gra qnlf.

50:4 Naq jura gur qnlf bs uvf zbheavat jrer cnfg, Wbfrcu fcnxr hagb
gur ubhfr bs Cunenbu, fnlvat, Vs abj V unir sbhaq tenpr va lbhe rlrf,
fcrnx, V cenl lbh, va gur rnef bs Cunenbu, fnlvat, 50:5 Zl sngure znqr
zr fjrne, fnlvat, Yb, V qvr: va zl tenir juvpu V unir qvttrq sbe zr va
gur ynaq bs Pnanna, gurer funyg gubh ohel zr. Abj gurersber yrg zr tb
hc, V cenl gurr, naq ohel zl sngure, naq V jvyy pbzr ntnva.

50:6 Naq Cunenbu fnvq, Tb hc, naq ohel gul sngure, nppbeqvat nf ur
znqr gurr fjrne.

50:7 Naq Wbfrcu jrag hc gb ohel uvf sngure: naq jvgu uvz jrag hc nyy
gur freinagf bs Cunenbu, gur ryqref bs uvf ubhfr, naq nyy gur ryqref
bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, 50:8 Naq nyy gur ubhfr bs Wbfrcu, naq uvf
oerguera, naq uvf sngure'f ubhfr: bayl gurve yvggyr barf, naq gurve
sybpxf, naq gurve ureqf, gurl yrsg va gur ynaq bs Tbfura.

50:9 Naq gurer jrag hc jvgu uvz obgu punevbgf naq ubefrzra: naq vg jnf
n irel terng pbzcnal.

50:10 Naq gurl pnzr gb gur guerfuvatsybbe bs Ngnq, juvpu vf orlbaq
Wbeqna, naq gurer gurl zbhearq jvgu n terng naq irel fber ynzragngvba:
naq ur znqr n zbheavat sbe uvf sngure frira qnlf.

50:11 Naq jura gur vaunovgnagf bs gur ynaq, gur Pnannavgrf, fnj gur
zbheavat va gur sybbe bs Ngnq, gurl fnvq, Guvf vf n tevribhf zbheavat
gb gur Rtlcgvnaf: jurersber gur anzr bs vg jnf pnyyrq Noryzvmenvz,
juvpu vf orlbaq Wbeqna.

50:12 Naq uvf fbaf qvq hagb uvz nppbeqvat nf ur pbzznaqrq gurz: 50:13
Sbe uvf fbaf pneevrq uvz vagb gur ynaq bs Pnanna, naq ohevrq uvz va
gur pnir bs gur svryq bs Znpucrynu, juvpu Noenunz obhtug jvgu gur
svryq sbe n cbffrffvba bs n ohelvatcynpr bs Rcueba gur Uvggvgr, orsber
Znzer.

50:14 Naq Wbfrcu erghearq vagb Rtlcg, ur, naq uvf oerguera, naq nyy
gung jrag hc jvgu uvz gb ohel uvf sngure, nsgre ur unq ohevrq uvf
sngure.

50:15 Naq jura Wbfrcu'f oerguera fnj gung gurve sngure jnf qrnq, gurl
fnvq, Wbfrcu jvyy crenqiragher ungr hf, naq jvyy pregnvayl erdhvgr hf
nyy gur rivy juvpu jr qvq hagb uvz.

50:16 Naq gurl frag n zrffratre hagb Wbfrcu, fnlvat, Gul sngure qvq
pbzznaq orsber ur qvrq, fnlvat, 50:17 Fb funyy lr fnl hagb Wbfrcu,
Sbetvir, V cenl gurr abj, gur gerfcnff bs gul oerguera, naq gurve fva;
sbe gurl qvq hagb gurr rivy: naq abj, jr cenl gurr, sbetvir gur
gerfcnff bs gur freinagf bs gur Tbq bs gul sngure. Naq Wbfrcu jrcg
jura gurl fcnxr hagb uvz.

50:18 Naq uvf oerguera nyfb jrag naq sryy qbja orsber uvf snpr; naq
gurl fnvq, Orubyq, jr or gul freinagf.

50:19 Naq Wbfrcu fnvq hagb gurz, Srne abg: sbe nz V va gur cynpr bs
Tbq?  50:20 Ohg nf sbe lbh, lr gubhtug rivy ntnvafg zr; ohg Tbq zrnag
vg hagb tbbq, gb oevat gb cnff, nf vg vf guvf qnl, gb fnir zhpu crbcyr
nyvir.

50:21 Abj gurersber srne lr abg: V jvyy abhevfu lbh, naq lbhe yvggyr
barf.

Naq ur pbzsbegrq gurz, naq fcnxr xvaqyl hagb gurz.

50:22 Naq Wbfrcu qjryg va Rtlcg, ur, naq uvf sngure'f ubhfr: naq
Wbfrcu yvirq na uhaqerq naq gra lrnef.

50:23 Naq Wbfrcu fnj Rcuenvz'f puvyqera bs gur guveq trarengvba: gur
puvyqera nyfb bs Znpuve gur fba bs Znanffru jrer oebhtug hc hcba
Wbfrcu'f xarrf.

50:24 Naq Wbfrcu fnvq hagb uvf oerguera, V qvr: naq Tbq jvyy fheryl
ivfvg lbh, naq oevat lbh bhg bs guvf ynaq hagb gur ynaq juvpu ur fjner
gb Noenunz, gb Vfnnp, naq gb Wnpbo.

50:25 Naq Wbfrcu gbbx na bngu bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Tbq
jvyy fheryl ivfvg lbh, naq lr funyy pneel hc zl obarf sebz urapr.

50:26 Fb Wbfrcu qvrq, orvat na uhaqerq naq gra lrnef byq: naq gurl
rzonyzrq uvz, naq ur jnf chg va n pbssva va Rtlcg.




Gur Frpbaq Obbx bs Zbfrf:  Pnyyrq Rkbqhf


1:1 Abj gurfr ner gur anzrf bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, juvpu pnzr
vagb Rtlcg; rirel zna naq uvf ubhfrubyq pnzr jvgu Wnpbo.

1:2 Erhora, Fvzrba, Yriv, naq Whqnu, 1:3 Vffnpune, Mrohyha, naq
Orawnzva, 1:4 Qna, naq Ancugnyv, Tnq, naq Nfure.

1:5 Naq nyy gur fbhyf gung pnzr bhg bs gur ybvaf bs Wnpbo jrer friragl
fbhyf: sbe Wbfrcu jnf va Rtlcg nyernql.

1:6 Naq Wbfrcu qvrq, naq nyy uvf oerguera, naq nyy gung trarengvba.

1:7 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jrer sehvgshy, naq vapernfrq
nohaqnagyl, naq zhygvcyvrq, naq jnkrq rkprrqvat zvtugl; naq gur ynaq
jnf svyyrq jvgu gurz.

1:8 Abj gurer nebfr hc n arj xvat bire Rtlcg, juvpu xarj abg Wbfrcu.

1:9 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvf crbcyr, Orubyq, gur crbcyr bs gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry ner zber naq zvtugvre guna jr: 1:10 Pbzr ba, yrg hf qrny jvfryl
jvgu gurz; yrfg gurl zhygvcyl, naq vg pbzr gb cnff, gung, jura gurer
snyyrgu bhg nal jne, gurl wbva nyfb hagb bhe rarzvrf, naq svtug
ntnvafg hf, naq fb trg gurz hc bhg bs gur ynaq.

1:11 Gurersber gurl qvq frg bire gurz gnfxznfgref gb nssyvpg gurz jvgu
gurve oheqraf. Naq gurl ohvyg sbe Cunenbu gernfher pvgvrf, Cvgubz naq
Ennzfrf.

1:12 Ohg gur zber gurl nssyvpgrq gurz, gur zber gurl zhygvcyvrq naq
terj.

Naq gurl jrer tevrirq orpnhfr bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

1:13 Naq gur Rtlcgvnaf znqr gur puvyqera bs Vfenry gb freir jvgu
evtbhe: 1:14 Naq gurl znqr gurve yvirf ovggre jvgu uneq obaqntr, va
zbegre, naq va oevpx, naq va nyy znaare bs freivpr va gur svryq: nyy
gurve freivpr, jurerva gurl znqr gurz freir, jnf jvgu evtbhe.

1:15 Naq gur xvat bs Rtlcg fcnxr gb gur Uroerj zvqjvirf, bs juvpu gur
anzr bs gur bar jnf Fuvcuenu, naq gur anzr bs gur bgure Chnu: 1:16 Naq
ur fnvq, Jura lr qb gur bssvpr bs n zvqjvsr gb gur Uroerj jbzra, naq
frr gurz hcba gur fgbbyf; vs vg or n fba, gura lr funyy xvyy uvz: ohg
vs vg or n qnhtugre, gura fur funyy yvir.

1:17 Ohg gur zvqjvirf srnerq Tbq, naq qvq abg nf gur xvat bs Rtlcg
pbzznaqrq gurz, ohg fnirq gur zra puvyqera nyvir.

1:18 Naq gur xvat bs Rtlcg pnyyrq sbe gur zvqjvirf, naq fnvq hagb
gurz, Jul unir lr qbar guvf guvat, naq unir fnirq gur zra puvyqera
nyvir?  1:19 Naq gur zvqjvirf fnvq hagb Cunenbu, Orpnhfr gur Uroerj
jbzra ner abg nf gur Rtlcgvna jbzra; sbe gurl ner yviryl, naq ner
qryvirerq rer gur zvqjvirf pbzr va hagb gurz.

1:20 Gurersber Tbq qrnyg jryy jvgu gur zvqjvirf: naq gur crbcyr
zhygvcyvrq, naq jnkrq irel zvtugl.

1:21 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, orpnhfr gur zvqjvirf srnerq Tbq, gung ur
znqr gurz ubhfrf.

1:22 Naq Cunenbu punetrq nyy uvf crbcyr, fnlvat, Rirel fba gung vf
obea lr funyy pnfg vagb gur evire, naq rirel qnhtugre lr funyy fnir
nyvir.

2:1 Naq gurer jrag n zna bs gur ubhfr bs Yriv, naq gbbx gb jvsr n
qnhtugre bs Yriv.

2:2 Naq gur jbzna pbaprvirq, naq oner n fba: naq jura fur fnj uvz gung
ur jnf n tbbqyl puvyq, fur uvq uvz guerr zbaguf.

2:3 Naq jura fur pbhyq abg ybatre uvqr uvz, fur gbbx sbe uvz na nex bs
ohyehfurf, naq qnhorq vg jvgu fyvzr naq jvgu cvgpu, naq chg gur puvyq
gurerva; naq fur ynvq vg va gur syntf ol gur evire'f oevax.

2:4 Naq uvf fvfgre fgbbq nsne bss, gb jvg jung jbhyq or qbar gb uvz.

2:5 Naq gur qnhtugre bs Cunenbu pnzr qbja gb jnfu urefrys ng gur
evire; naq ure znvqraf jnyxrq nybat ol gur evire'f fvqr; naq jura fur
fnj gur nex nzbat gur syntf, fur frag ure znvq gb srgpu vg.

2:6 Naq jura fur unq bcrarq vg, fur fnj gur puvyq: naq, orubyq, gur
onor jrcg. Naq fur unq pbzcnffvba ba uvz, naq fnvq, Guvf vf bar bs gur
Uroerjf' puvyqera.

2:7 Gura fnvq uvf fvfgre gb Cunenbu'f qnhtugre, Funyy V tb naq pnyy gb
gurr n ahefr bs gur Uroerj jbzra, gung fur znl ahefr gur puvyq sbe
gurr?  2:8 Naq Cunenbu'f qnhtugre fnvq gb ure, Tb. Naq gur znvq jrag
naq pnyyrq gur puvyq'f zbgure.

2:9 Naq Cunenbu'f qnhtugre fnvq hagb ure, Gnxr guvf puvyq njnl, naq
ahefr vg sbe zr, naq V jvyy tvir gurr gul jntrf. Naq gur jbzra gbbx
gur puvyq, naq ahefrq vg.

2:10 Naq gur puvyq terj, naq fur oebhtug uvz hagb Cunenbu'f qnhtugre,
naq ur orpnzr ure fba. Naq fur pnyyrq uvf anzr Zbfrf: naq fur fnvq,
Orpnhfr V qerj uvz bhg bs gur jngre.

2:11 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gubfr qnlf, jura Zbfrf jnf tebja, gung ur
jrag bhg hagb uvf oerguera, naq ybbxrq ba gurve oheqraf: naq ur fcvrq
na Rtlcgvna fzvgvat na Uroerj, bar bs uvf oerguera.

2:12 Naq ur ybbxrq guvf jnl naq gung jnl, naq jura ur fnj gung gurer
jnf ab zna, ur fyrj gur Rtlcgvna, naq uvq uvz va gur fnaq.

2:13 Naq jura ur jrag bhg gur frpbaq qnl, orubyq, gjb zra bs gur
Uroerjf fgebir gbtrgure: naq ur fnvq gb uvz gung qvq gur jebat,
Jurersber fzvgrfg gubh gul sryybj?  2:14 Naq ur fnvq, Jub znqr gurr n
cevapr naq n whqtr bire hf? vagraqrfg gubh gb xvyy zr, nf gubh
xvyyrqfg gur Rtlcgvna? Naq Zbfrf srnerq, naq fnvq, Fheryl guvf guvat
vf xabja.

2:15 Abj jura Cunenbu urneq guvf guvat, ur fbhtug gb fynl Zbfrf. Ohg
Zbfrf syrq sebz gur snpr bs Cunenbu, naq qjryg va gur ynaq bs Zvqvna:
naq ur fng qbja ol n jryy.

2:16 Abj gur cevrfg bs Zvqvna unq frira qnhtugref: naq gurl pnzr naq
qerj jngre, naq svyyrq gur gebhtuf gb jngre gurve sngure'f sybpx.

2:17 Naq gur furcureqf pnzr naq qebir gurz njnl: ohg Zbfrf fgbbq hc
naq urycrq gurz, naq jngrerq gurve sybpx.

2:18 Naq jura gurl pnzr gb Erhry gurve sngure, ur fnvq, Ubj vf vg gung
lr ner pbzr fb fbba gb qnl?  2:19 Naq gurl fnvq, Na Rtlcgvna qryvirerq
hf bhg bs gur unaq bs gur furcureqf, naq nyfb qerj jngre rabhtu sbe
hf, naq jngrerq gur sybpx.

2:20 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvf qnhtugref, Naq jurer vf ur? jul vf vg gung
lr unir yrsg gur zna? pnyy uvz, gung ur znl rng oernq.

2:21 Naq Zbfrf jnf pbagrag gb qjryy jvgu gur zna: naq ur tnir Zbfrf
Mvccbenu uvf qnhtugre.

2:22 Naq fur oner uvz n fba, naq ur pnyyrq uvf anzr Trefubz: sbe ur
fnvq, V unir orra n fgenatre va n fgenatr ynaq.

2:23 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va cebprff bs gvzr, gung gur xvat bs Rtlcg
qvrq: naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry fvturq ol ernfba bs gur obaqntr, naq
gurl pevrq, naq gurve pel pnzr hc hagb Tbq ol ernfba bs gur obaqntr.

2:24 Naq Tbq urneq gurve tebnavat, naq Tbq erzrzorerq uvf pbiranag
jvgu Noenunz, jvgu Vfnnp, naq jvgu Wnpbo.

2:25 Naq Tbq ybbxrq hcba gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq Tbq unq erfcrpg
hagb gurz.

3:1 Abj Zbfrf xrcg gur sybpx bs Wrgueb uvf sngure va ynj, gur cevrfg
bs Zvqvna: naq ur yrq gur sybpx gb gur onpxfvqr bs gur qrfreg, naq
pnzr gb gur zbhagnva bs Tbq, rira gb Ubero.

3:2 Naq gur natry bs gur YBEQ nccrnerq hagb uvz va n synzr bs sver bhg
bs gur zvqfg bs n ohfu: naq ur ybbxrq, naq, orubyq, gur ohfu ohearq
jvgu sver, naq gur ohfu jnf abg pbafhzrq.

3:3 Naq Zbfrf fnvq, V jvyy abj ghea nfvqr, naq frr guvf terng fvtug,
jul gur ohfu vf abg oheag.

3:4 Naq jura gur YBEQ fnj gung ur ghearq nfvqr gb frr, Tbq pnyyrq hagb
uvz bhg bs gur zvqfg bs gur ohfu, naq fnvq, Zbfrf, Zbfrf. Naq ur fnvq,
Urer nz V.

3:5 Naq ur fnvq, Qenj abg avtu uvgure: chg bss gul fubrf sebz bss gul
srrg, sbe gur cynpr jurerba gubh fgnaqrfg vf ubyl tebhaq.

3:6 Zberbire ur fnvq, V nz gur Tbq bs gul sngure, gur Tbq bs Noenunz,
gur Tbq bs Vfnnp, naq gur Tbq bs Wnpbo. Naq Zbfrf uvq uvf snpr; sbe ur
jnf nsenvq gb ybbx hcba Tbq.

3:7 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq, V unir fheryl frra gur nssyvpgvba bs zl crbcyr
juvpu ner va Rtlcg, naq unir urneq gurve pel ol ernfba bs gurve
gnfxznfgref; sbe V xabj gurve fbeebjf; 3:8 Naq V nz pbzr qbja gb
qryvire gurz bhg bs gur unaq bs gur Rtlcgvnaf, naq gb oevat gurz hc
bhg bs gung ynaq hagb n tbbq ynaq naq n ynetr, hagb n ynaq sybjvat
jvgu zvyx naq ubarl; hagb gur cynpr bs gur Pnannavgrf, naq gur
Uvggvgrf, naq gur Nzbevgrf, naq gur Crevmmvgrf, naq gur Uvivgrf, naq
gur Wrohfvgrf.

3:9 Abj gurersber, orubyq, gur pel bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry vf pbzr
hagb zr: naq V unir nyfb frra gur bccerffvba jurerjvgu gur Rtlcgvnaf
bccerff gurz.

3:10 Pbzr abj gurersber, naq V jvyy fraq gurr hagb Cunenbu, gung gubh
znlrfg oevat sbegu zl crbcyr gur puvyqera bs Vfenry bhg bs Rtlcg.

3:11 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb Tbq, Jub nz V, gung V fubhyq tb hagb Cunenbu,
naq gung V fubhyq oevat sbegu gur puvyqera bs Vfenry bhg bs Rtlcg?
3:12 Naq ur fnvq, Pregnvayl V jvyy or jvgu gurr; naq guvf funyy or n
gbxra hagb gurr, gung V unir frag gurr: Jura gubh unfg oebhtug sbegu
gur crbcyr bhg bs Rtlcg, lr funyy freir Tbq hcba guvf zbhagnva.

3:13 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb Tbq, Orubyq, jura V pbzr hagb gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, naq funyy fnl hagb gurz, Gur Tbq bs lbhe snguref ungu frag zr
hagb lbh; naq gurl funyy fnl gb zr, Jung vf uvf anzr? jung funyy V fnl
hagb gurz?  3:14 Naq Tbq fnvq hagb Zbfrf, V NZ GUNG V NZ: naq ur fnvq,
Guhf funyg gubh fnl hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, V NZ ungu frag zr
hagb lbh.

3:15 Naq Tbq fnvq zberbire hagb Zbfrf, Guhf funyg gubh fnl hagb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, gur YBEQ Tbq bs lbhe snguref, gur Tbq bs Noenunz,
gur Tbq bs Vfnnp, naq gur Tbq bs Wnpbo, ungu frag zr hagb lbh: guvf vf
zl anzr sbe rire, naq guvf vf zl zrzbevny hagb nyy trarengvbaf.

3:16 Tb, naq tngure gur ryqref bs Vfenry gbtrgure, naq fnl hagb gurz,
Gur YBEQ Tbq bs lbhe snguref, gur Tbq bs Noenunz, bs Vfnnp, naq bs
Wnpbo, nccrnerq hagb zr, fnlvat, V unir fheryl ivfvgrq lbh, naq frra
gung juvpu vf qbar gb lbh va Rtlcg: 3:17 Naq V unir fnvq, V jvyy oevat
lbh hc bhg bs gur nssyvpgvba bs Rtlcg hagb gur ynaq bs gur Pnannavgrf,
naq gur Uvggvgrf, naq gur Nzbevgrf, naq gur Crevmmvgrf, naq gur
Uvivgrf, naq gur Wrohfvgrf, hagb n ynaq sybjvat jvgu zvyx naq ubarl.

3:18 Naq gurl funyy urnexra gb gul ibvpr: naq gubh funyg pbzr, gubh
naq gur ryqref bs Vfenry, hagb gur xvat bs Rtlcg, naq lr funyy fnl
hagb uvz, Gur YBEQ Tbq bs gur Uroerjf ungu zrg jvgu hf: naq abj yrg hf
tb, jr orfrrpu gurr, guerr qnlf' wbhearl vagb gur jvyqrearff, gung jr
znl fnpevsvpr gb gur YBEQ bhe Tbq.

3:19 Naq V nz fher gung gur xvat bs Rtlcg jvyy abg yrg lbh tb, ab, abg
ol n zvtugl unaq.

3:20 Naq V jvyy fgergpu bhg zl unaq, naq fzvgr Rtlcg jvgu nyy zl
jbaqref juvpu V jvyy qb va gur zvqfg gurerbs: naq nsgre gung ur jvyy
yrg lbh tb.

3:21 Naq V jvyy tvir guvf crbcyr snibhe va gur fvtug bs gur Rtlcgvnaf:
naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, gung, jura lr tb, lr funyy abg tb rzcgl.

3:22 Ohg rirel jbzna funyy obeebj bs ure arvtuobhe, naq bs ure gung
fbwbheargu va ure ubhfr, wrjryf bs fvyire, naq wrjryf bs tbyq, naq
envzrag: naq lr funyy chg gurz hcba lbhe fbaf, naq hcba lbhe
qnhtugref; naq lr funyy fcbvy gur Rtlcgvnaf.

4:1 Naq Zbfrf nafjrerq naq fnvq, Ohg, orubyq, gurl jvyy abg oryvrir
zr, abe urnexra hagb zl ibvpr: sbe gurl jvyy fnl, Gur YBEQ ungu abg
nccrnerq hagb gurr.

4:2 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb uvz, Jung vf gung va guvar unaq? Naq ur
fnvq, N ebq.

4:3 Naq ur fnvq, Pnfg vg ba gur tebhaq. Naq ur pnfg vg ba gur tebhaq,
naq vg orpnzr n frecrag; naq Zbfrf syrq sebz orsber vg.

4:4 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Chg sbegu guvar unaq, naq gnxr vg ol
gur gnvy. Naq ur chg sbegu uvf unaq, naq pnhtug vg, naq vg orpnzr n
ebq va uvf unaq: 4:5 Gung gurl znl oryvrir gung gur YBEQ Tbq bs gurve
snguref, gur Tbq bs Noenunz, gur Tbq bs Vfnnp, naq gur Tbq bs Wnpbo,
ungu nccrnerq hagb gurr.

4:6 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq shegurezber hagb uvz, Chg abj guvar unaq vagb
gul obfbz. Naq ur chg uvf unaq vagb uvf obfbz: naq jura ur gbbx vg
bhg, orubyq, uvf unaq jnf yrcebhf nf fabj.

4:7 Naq ur fnvq, Chg guvar unaq vagb gul obfbz ntnva. Naq ur chg uvf
unaq vagb uvf obfbz ntnva; naq cyhpxrq vg bhg bs uvf obfbz, naq,
orubyq, vg jnf ghearq ntnva nf uvf bgure syrfu.

4:8 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, vs gurl jvyy abg oryvrir gurr, arvgure
urnexra gb gur ibvpr bs gur svefg fvta, gung gurl jvyy oryvrir gur
ibvpr bs gur ynggre fvta.

4:9 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, vs gurl jvyy abg oryvrir nyfb gurfr gjb
fvtaf, arvgure urnexra hagb gul ibvpr, gung gubh funyg gnxr bs gur
jngre bs gur evire, naq cbhe vg hcba gur qel ynaq: naq gur jngre juvpu
gubh gnxrfg bhg bs gur evire funyy orpbzr oybbq hcba gur qel ynaq.

4:10 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb gur YBEQ, B zl YBEQ, V nz abg rybdhrag,
arvgure urergbsber, abe fvapr gubh unfg fcbxra hagb gul freinag: ohg V
nz fybj bs fcrrpu, naq bs n fybj gbathr.

4:11 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb uvz, Jub ungu znqr zna'f zbhgu? be jub
znxrgu gur qhzo, be qrns, be gur frrvat, be gur oyvaq? unir abg V gur
YBEQ?  4:12 Abj gurersber tb, naq V jvyy or jvgu gul zbhgu, naq grnpu
gurr jung gubh funyg fnl.

4:13 Naq ur fnvq, B zl YBEQ, fraq, V cenl gurr, ol gur unaq bs uvz
jubz gubh jvyg fraq.

4:14 Naq gur natre bs gur YBEQ jnf xvaqyrq ntnvafg Zbfrf, naq ur fnvq,
Vf abg Nneba gur Yrivgr gul oebgure? V xabj gung ur pna fcrnx jryy.
Naq nyfb, orubyq, ur pbzrgu sbegu gb zrrg gurr: naq jura ur frrgu
gurr, ur jvyy or tynq va uvf urneg.

4:15 Naq gubh funyg fcrnx hagb uvz, naq chg jbeqf va uvf zbhgu: naq V
jvyy or jvgu gul zbhgu, naq jvgu uvf zbhgu, naq jvyy grnpu lbh jung lr
funyy qb.

4:16 Naq ur funyy or gul fcbxrfzna hagb gur crbcyr: naq ur funyy or,
rira ur funyy or gb gurr vafgrnq bs n zbhgu, naq gubh funyg or gb uvz
vafgrnq bs Tbq.

4:17 Naq gubh funyg gnxr guvf ebq va guvar unaq, jurerjvgu gubh funyg
qb fvtaf.

4:18 Naq Zbfrf jrag naq erghearq gb Wrgueb uvf sngure va ynj, naq fnvq
hagb uvz, Yrg zr tb, V cenl gurr, naq erghea hagb zl oerguera juvpu
ner va Rtlcg, naq frr jurgure gurl or lrg nyvir. Naq Wrgueb fnvq gb
Zbfrf, Tb va crnpr.

4:19 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf va Zvqvna, Tb, erghea vagb Rtlcg:
sbe nyy gur zra ner qrnq juvpu fbhtug gul yvsr.

4:20 Naq Zbfrf gbbx uvf jvsr naq uvf fbaf, naq frg gurz hcba na nff,
naq ur erghearq gb gur ynaq bs Rtlcg: naq Zbfrf gbbx gur ebq bs Tbq va
uvf unaq.

4:21 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Jura gubh tbrfg gb erghea vagb
Rtlcg, frr gung gubh qb nyy gubfr jbaqref orsber Cunenbu, juvpu V unir
chg va guvar unaq: ohg V jvyy uneqra uvf urneg, gung ur funyy abg yrg
gur crbcyr tb.

4:22 Naq gubh funyg fnl hagb Cunenbu, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Vfenry vf
zl fba, rira zl svefgobea: 4:23 Naq V fnl hagb gurr, Yrg zl fba tb,
gung ur znl freir zr: naq vs gubh ershfr gb yrg uvz tb, orubyq, V jvyy
fynl gul fba, rira gul svefgobea.

4:24 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ol gur jnl va gur vaa, gung gur YBEQ zrg uvz,
naq fbhtug gb xvyy uvz.

4:25 Gura Mvccbenu gbbx n funec fgbar, naq phg bss gur sberfxva bs ure
fba, naq pnfg vg ng uvf srrg, naq fnvq, Fheryl n oybbql uhfonaq neg
gubh gb zr.

4:26 Fb ur yrg uvz tb: gura fur fnvq, N oybbql uhfonaq gubh neg,
orpnhfr bs gur pvephzpvfvba.

4:27 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq gb Nneba, Tb vagb gur jvyqrearff gb zrrg Zbfrf.
Naq ur jrag, naq zrg uvz va gur zbhag bs Tbq, naq xvffrq uvz.

4:28 Naq Zbfrf gbyq Nneba nyy gur jbeqf bs gur YBEQ jub unq frag uvz,
naq nyy gur fvtaf juvpu ur unq pbzznaqrq uvz.

4:29 Naq Zbfrf naq Nneba jrag naq tngurerq gbtrgure nyy gur ryqref bs
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry: 4:30 Naq Nneba fcnxr nyy gur jbeqf juvpu gur
YBEQ unq fcbxra hagb Zbfrf, naq qvq gur fvtaf va gur fvtug bs gur
crbcyr.

4:31 Naq gur crbcyr oryvrirq: naq jura gurl urneq gung gur YBEQ unq
ivfvgrq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq gung ur unq ybbxrq hcba gurve
nssyvpgvba, gura gurl objrq gurve urnqf naq jbefuvccrq.

5:1 Naq nsgrejneq Zbfrf naq Nneba jrag va, naq gbyq Cunenbu, Guhf
fnvgu gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, Yrg zl crbcyr tb, gung gurl znl ubyq n
srnfg hagb zr va gur jvyqrearff.

5:2 Naq Cunenbu fnvq, Jub vf gur YBEQ, gung V fubhyq borl uvf ibvpr gb
yrg Vfenry tb? V xabj abg gur YBEQ, arvgure jvyy V yrg Vfenry tb.

5:3 Naq gurl fnvq, Gur Tbq bs gur Uroerjf ungu zrg jvgu hf: yrg hf tb,
jr cenl gurr, guerr qnlf' wbhearl vagb gur qrfreg, naq fnpevsvpr hagb
gur YBEQ bhe Tbq; yrfg ur snyy hcba hf jvgu crfgvyrapr, be jvgu gur
fjbeq.

5:4 Naq gur xvat bs Rtlcg fnvq hagb gurz, Jurersber qb lr, Zbfrf naq
Nneba, yrg gur crbcyr sebz gurve jbexf? trg lbh hagb lbhe oheqraf.

5:5 Naq Cunenbu fnvq, Orubyq, gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq abj ner znal, naq
lr znxr gurz erfg sebz gurve oheqraf.

5:6 Naq Cunenbu pbzznaqrq gur fnzr qnl gur gnfxznfgref bs gur crbcyr,
naq gurve bssvpref, fnlvat, 5:7 Lr funyy ab zber tvir gur crbcyr fgenj
gb znxr oevpx, nf urergbsber: yrg gurz tb naq tngure fgenj sbe
gurzfryirf.

5:8 Naq gur gnyr bs gur oevpxf, juvpu gurl qvq znxr urergbsber, lr
funyy ynl hcba gurz; lr funyy abg qvzvavfu bhtug gurerbs: sbe gurl or
vqyr; gurersber gurl pel, fnlvat, Yrg hf tb naq fnpevsvpr gb bhe Tbq.

5:9 Yrg gurer zber jbex or ynvq hcba gur zra, gung gurl znl ynobhe
gurerva; naq yrg gurz abg ertneq inva jbeqf.

5:10 Naq gur gnfxznfgref bs gur crbcyr jrag bhg, naq gurve bssvpref,
naq gurl fcnxr gb gur crbcyr, fnlvat, Guhf fnvgu Cunenbu, V jvyy abg
tvir lbh fgenj.

5:11 Tb lr, trg lbh fgenj jurer lr pna svaq vg: lrg abg bhtug bs lbhe
jbex funyy or qvzvavfurq.

5:12 Fb gur crbcyr jrer fpnggrerq noebnq guebhtubhg nyy gur ynaq bs
Rtlcg gb tngure fghooyr vafgrnq bs fgenj.

5:13 Naq gur gnfxznfgref unfgrq gurz, fnlvat, Shysvy lbhe jbexf, lbhe
qnvyl gnfxf, nf jura gurer jnf fgenj.

5:14 Naq gur bssvpref bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, juvpu Cunenbu'f
gnfxznfgref unq frg bire gurz, jrer orngra, naq qrznaqrq, Jurersber
unir lr abg shysvyyrq lbhe gnfx va znxvat oevpx obgu lrfgreqnl naq gb
qnl, nf urergbsber?  5:15 Gura gur bssvpref bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry
pnzr naq pevrq hagb Cunenbu, fnlvat, Jurersber qrnyrfg gubh guhf jvgu
gul freinagf?  5:16 Gurer vf ab fgenj tvira hagb gul freinagf, naq
gurl fnl gb hf, Znxr oevpx: naq, orubyq, gul freinagf ner orngra; ohg
gur snhyg vf va guvar bja crbcyr.

5:17 Ohg ur fnvq, Lr ner vqyr, lr ner vqyr: gurersber lr fnl, Yrg hf
tb naq qb fnpevsvpr gb gur YBEQ.

5:18 Tb gurersber abj, naq jbex; sbe gurer funyy ab fgenj or tvira
lbh, lrg funyy lr qryvire gur gnyr bs oevpxf.

5:19 Naq gur bssvpref bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq frr gung gurl jrer
va rivy pnfr, nsgre vg jnf fnvq, Lr funyy abg zvavfu bhtug sebz lbhe
oevpxf bs lbhe qnvyl gnfx.

5:20 Naq gurl zrg Zbfrf naq Nneba, jub fgbbq va gur jnl, nf gurl pnzr
sbegu sebz Cunenbu: 5:21 Naq gurl fnvq hagb gurz, Gur YBEQ ybbx hcba
lbh, naq whqtr; orpnhfr lr unir znqr bhe fnibhe gb or noubeerq va gur
rlrf bs Cunenbu, naq va gur rlrf bs uvf freinagf, gb chg n fjbeq va
gurve unaq gb fynl hf.

5:22 Naq Zbfrf erghearq hagb gur YBEQ, naq fnvq, YBEQ, jurersber unfg
gubh fb rivy ragerngrq guvf crbcyr? jul vf vg gung gubh unfg frag zr?
5:23 Sbe fvapr V pnzr gb Cunenbu gb fcrnx va gul anzr, ur ungu qbar
rivy gb guvf crbcyr; arvgure unfg gubh qryvirerq gul crbcyr ng nyy.

6:1 Gura gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Abj funyg gubh frr jung V jvyy qb
gb Cunenbu: sbe jvgu n fgebat unaq funyy ur yrg gurz tb, naq jvgu n
fgebat unaq funyy ur qevir gurz bhg bs uvf ynaq.

6:2 Naq Tbq fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, naq fnvq hagb uvz, V nz gur YBEQ: 6:3
Naq V nccrnerq hagb Noenunz, hagb Vfnnp, naq hagb Wnpbo, ol gur anzr
bs Tbq Nyzvtugl, ohg ol zl anzr WRUBINU jnf V abg xabja gb gurz.

6:4 Naq V unir nyfb rfgnoyvfurq zl pbiranag jvgu gurz, gb tvir gurz
gur ynaq bs Pnanna, gur ynaq bs gurve cvytevzntr, jurerva gurl jrer
fgenatref.

6:5 Naq V unir nyfb urneq gur tebnavat bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, jubz
gur Rtlcgvnaf xrrc va obaqntr; naq V unir erzrzorerq zl pbiranag.

6:6 Jurersber fnl hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, V nz gur YBEQ, naq V
jvyy oevat lbh bhg sebz haqre gur oheqraf bs gur Rtlcgvnaf, naq V jvyy
evq lbh bhg bs gurve obaqntr, naq V jvyy erqrrz lbh jvgu n fgergpurq
bhg nez, naq jvgu terng whqtzragf: 6:7 Naq V jvyy gnxr lbh gb zr sbe n
crbcyr, naq V jvyy or gb lbh n Tbq: naq lr funyy xabj gung V nz gur
YBEQ lbhe Tbq, juvpu oevatrgu lbh bhg sebz haqre gur oheqraf bs gur
Rtlcgvnaf.

6:8 Naq V jvyy oevat lbh va hagb gur ynaq, pbapreavat gur juvpu V qvq
fjrne gb tvir vg gb Noenunz, gb Vfnnp, naq gb Wnpbo; naq V jvyy tvir
vg lbh sbe na urevgntr: V nz gur YBEQ.

6:9 Naq Zbfrf fcnxr fb hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry: ohg gurl urnexrarq
abg hagb Zbfrf sbe nathvfu bs fcvevg, naq sbe pehry obaqntr.

6:10 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 6:11 Tb va, fcrnx hagb
Cunenbu xvat bs Rtlcg, gung ur yrg gur puvyqera bs Vfenry tb bhg bs
uvf ynaq.

6:12 Naq Zbfrf fcnxr orsber gur YBEQ, fnlvat, Orubyq, gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry unir abg urnexrarq hagb zr; ubj gura funyy Cunenbu urne zr, jub
nz bs hapvephzpvfrq yvcf?  6:13 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf naq hagb
Nneba, naq tnir gurz n punetr hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq hagb
Cunenbu xvat bs Rtlcg, gb oevat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry bhg bs gur ynaq
bs Rtlcg.

6:14 Gurfr or gur urnqf bs gurve snguref' ubhfrf: Gur fbaf bs Erhora
gur svefgobea bs Vfenry; Unabpu, naq Cnyyh, Urmeba, naq Pnezv: gurfr
or gur snzvyvrf bs Erhora.

6:15 Naq gur fbaf bs Fvzrba; Wrzhry, naq Wnzva, naq Bunq, naq Wnpuva,
naq Mbune, naq Funhy gur fba bs n Pnannavgvfu jbzna: gurfr ner gur
snzvyvrf bs Fvzrba.

6:16 Naq gurfr ner gur anzrf bs gur fbaf bs Yriv nppbeqvat gb gurve
trarengvbaf; Trefuba, naq Xbungu, naq Zrenev: naq gur lrnef bs gur
yvsr bs Yriv jrer na uhaqerq guvegl naq frira lrnef.

6:17 Gur fbaf bs Trefuba; Yvoav, naq Fuvzv, nppbeqvat gb gurve
snzvyvrf.

6:18 Naq gur fbaf bs Xbungu; Nzenz, naq Vmune, naq Uroeba, naq Hmmvry:
naq gur lrnef bs gur yvsr bs Xbungu jrer na uhaqerq guvegl naq guerr
lrnef.

6:19 Naq gur fbaf bs Zrenev; Znunyv naq Zhfuv: gurfr ner gur snzvyvrf
bs Yriv nppbeqvat gb gurve trarengvbaf.

6:20 Naq Nzenz gbbx uvz Wbpurorq uvf sngure'f fvfgre gb jvsr; naq fur
oner uvz Nneba naq Zbfrf: naq gur lrnef bs gur yvsr bs Nzenz jrer na
uhaqerq naq guvegl naq frira lrnef.

6:21 Naq gur fbaf bs Vmune; Xbenu, naq Arcurt, naq Mvpuev.

6:22 Naq gur fbaf bs Hmmvry; Zvfunry, naq Rymncuna, naq Mvguev.

6:23 Naq Nneba gbbx uvz Ryvfuron, qnhtugre bs Nzzvanqno, fvfgre bs
Annfuba, gb jvsr; naq fur oner uvz Anqno, naq Novuh, Ryrnmne, naq
Vgunzne.

6:24 Naq gur fbaf bs Xbenu; Nffve, naq Ryxnanu, naq Novnfncu: gurfr
ner gur snzvyvrf bs gur Xbeuvgrf.

6:25 Naq Ryrnmne Nneba'f fba gbbx uvz bar bs gur qnhtugref bs Chgvry
gb jvsr; naq fur oner uvz Cuvarunf: gurfr ner gur urnqf bs gur snguref
bs gur Yrivgrf nppbeqvat gb gurve snzvyvrf.

6:26 Gurfr ner gung Nneba naq Zbfrf, gb jubz gur YBEQ fnvq, Oevat bhg
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry sebz gur ynaq bs Rtlcg nppbeqvat gb gurve
nezvrf.

6:27 Gurfr ner gurl juvpu fcnxr gb Cunenbu xvat bs Rtlcg, gb oevat bhg
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry sebz Rtlcg: gurfr ner gung Zbfrf naq Nneba.

6:28 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ba gur qnl jura gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf va
gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, 6:29 Gung gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, V nz
gur YBEQ: fcrnx gubh hagb Cunenbu xvat bs Rtlcg nyy gung V fnl hagb
gurr.

6:30 Naq Zbfrf fnvq orsber gur YBEQ, Orubyq, V nz bs hapvephzpvfrq
yvcf, naq ubj funyy Cunenbu urnexra hagb zr?  7:1 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq
hagb Zbfrf, Frr, V unir znqr gurr n tbq gb Cunenbu: naq Nneba gul
oebgure funyy or gul cebcurg.

7:2 Gubh funyg fcrnx nyy gung V pbzznaq gurr: naq Nneba gul oebgure
funyy fcrnx hagb Cunenbu, gung ur fraq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry bhg bs
uvf ynaq.

7:3 Naq V jvyy uneqra Cunenbu'f urneg, naq zhygvcyl zl fvtaf naq zl
jbaqref va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

7:4 Ohg Cunenbu funyy abg urnexra hagb lbh, gung V znl ynl zl unaq
hcba Rtlcg, naq oevat sbegu zvar nezvrf, naq zl crbcyr gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg ol terng whqtzragf.

7:5 Naq gur Rtlcgvnaf funyy xabj gung V nz gur YBEQ, jura V fgergpu
sbegu zvar unaq hcba Rtlcg, naq oevat bhg gur puvyqera bs Vfenry sebz
nzbat gurz.

7:6 Naq Zbfrf naq Nneba qvq nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq gurz, fb qvq gurl.

7:7 Naq Zbfrf jnf sbhefpber lrnef byq, naq Nneba sbhefpber naq guerr
lrnef byq, jura gurl fcnxr hagb Cunenbu.

7:8 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf naq hagb Nneba, fnlvat, 7:9 Jura
Cunenbu funyy fcrnx hagb lbh, fnlvat, Furj n zvenpyr sbe lbh: gura
gubh funyg fnl hagb Nneba, Gnxr gul ebq, naq pnfg vg orsber Cunenbu,
naq vg funyy orpbzr n frecrag.

7:10 Naq Zbfrf naq Nneba jrag va hagb Cunenbu, naq gurl qvq fb nf gur
YBEQ unq pbzznaqrq: naq Nneba pnfg qbja uvf ebq orsber Cunenbu, naq
orsber uvf freinagf, naq vg orpnzr n frecrag.

7:11 Gura Cunenbu nyfb pnyyrq gur jvfr zra naq gur fbepreref: abj gur
zntvpvnaf bs Rtlcg, gurl nyfb qvq va yvxr znaare jvgu gurve
rapunagzragf.

7:12 Sbe gurl pnfg qbja rirel zna uvf ebq, naq gurl orpnzr frecragf:
ohg Nneba'f ebq fjnyybjrq hc gurve ebqf.

7:13 Naq ur uneqrarq Cunenbu'f urneg, gung ur urnexrarq abg hagb gurz;
nf gur YBEQ unq fnvq.

7:14 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Cunenbu'f urneg vf uneqrarq, ur
ershfrgu gb yrg gur crbcyr tb.

7:15 Trg gurr hagb Cunenbu va gur zbeavat; yb, ur tbrgu bhg hagb gur
jngre; naq gubh funyg fgnaq ol gur evire'f oevax ntnvafg ur pbzr; naq
gur ebq juvpu jnf ghearq gb n frecrag funyg gubh gnxr va guvar unaq.

7:16 Naq gubh funyg fnl hagb uvz, Gur YBEQ Tbq bs gur Uroerjf ungu
frag zr hagb gurr, fnlvat, Yrg zl crbcyr tb, gung gurl znl freir zr va
gur jvyqrearff: naq, orubyq, uvguregb gubh jbhyqrfg abg urne.

7:17 Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Va guvf gubh funyg xabj gung V nz gur YBEQ:
orubyq, V jvyy fzvgr jvgu gur ebq gung vf va zvar unaq hcba gur jngref
juvpu ner va gur evire, naq gurl funyy or ghearq gb oybbq.

7:18 Naq gur svfu gung vf va gur evire funyy qvr, naq gur evire funyy
fgvax; naq gur Rtlcgvnaf funyy ybgur gb qevax bs gur jngre bs gur
evire.

7:19 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, Fnl hagb Nneba, Gnxr gul ebq, naq
fgergpu bhg guvar unaq hcba gur jngref bs Rtlcg, hcba gurve fgernzf,
hcba gurve eviref, naq hcba gurve cbaqf, naq hcba nyy gurve cbbyf bs
jngre, gung gurl znl orpbzr oybbq; naq gung gurer znl or oybbq
guebhtubhg nyy gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, obgu va irffryf bs jbbq, naq va
irffryf bs fgbar.

7:20 Naq Zbfrf naq Nneba qvq fb, nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq; naq ur yvsgrq
hc gur ebq, naq fzbgr gur jngref gung jrer va gur evire, va gur fvtug
bs Cunenbu, naq va gur fvtug bs uvf freinagf; naq nyy gur jngref gung
jrer va gur evire jrer ghearq gb oybbq.

7:21 Naq gur svfu gung jnf va gur evire qvrq; naq gur evire fgnax, naq
gur Rtlcgvnaf pbhyq abg qevax bs gur jngre bs gur evire; naq gurer jnf
oybbq guebhtubhg nyy gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

7:22 Naq gur zntvpvnaf bs Rtlcg qvq fb jvgu gurve rapunagzragf: naq
Cunenbu'f urneg jnf uneqrarq, arvgure qvq ur urnexra hagb gurz; nf gur
YBEQ unq fnvq.

7:23 Naq Cunenbu ghearq naq jrag vagb uvf ubhfr, arvgure qvq ur frg
uvf urneg gb guvf nyfb.

7:24 Naq nyy gur Rtlcgvnaf qvttrq ebhaq nobhg gur evire sbe jngre gb
qevax; sbe gurl pbhyq abg qevax bs gur jngre bs gur evire.

7:25 Naq frira qnlf jrer shysvyyrq, nsgre gung gur YBEQ unq fzvggra
gur evire.

8:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, Tb hagb Cunenbu, naq fnl hagb uvz,
Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Yrg zl crbcyr tb, gung gurl znl freir zr.

8:2 Naq vs gubh ershfr gb yrg gurz tb, orubyq, V jvyy fzvgr nyy gul
obeqref jvgu sebtf: 8:3 Naq gur evire funyy oevat sbegu sebtf
nohaqnagyl, juvpu funyy tb hc naq pbzr vagb guvar ubhfr, naq vagb gul
orqpunzore, naq hcba gul orq, naq vagb gur ubhfr bs gul freinagf, naq
hcba gul crbcyr, naq vagb guvar biraf, naq vagb gul xarnqvatgebhtuf:
8:4 Naq gur sebtf funyy pbzr hc obgu ba gurr, naq hcba gul crbcyr, naq
hcba nyy gul freinagf.

8:5 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, Fnl hagb Nneba, Fgergpu sbegu guvar
unaq jvgu gul ebq bire gur fgernzf, bire gur eviref, naq bire gur
cbaqf, naq pnhfr sebtf gb pbzr hc hcba gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

8:6 Naq Nneba fgergpurq bhg uvf unaq bire gur jngref bs Rtlcg; naq gur
sebtf pnzr hc, naq pbirerq gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

8:7 Naq gur zntvpvnaf qvq fb jvgu gurve rapunagzragf, naq oebhtug hc
sebtf hcba gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

8:8 Gura Cunenbu pnyyrq sbe Zbfrf naq Nneba, naq fnvq, Vagerng gur
YBEQ, gung ur znl gnxr njnl gur sebtf sebz zr, naq sebz zl crbcyr; naq
V jvyy yrg gur crbcyr tb, gung gurl znl qb fnpevsvpr hagb gur YBEQ.

8:9 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb Cunenbu, Tybel bire zr: jura funyy V vagerng
sbe gurr, naq sbe gul freinagf, naq sbe gul crbcyr, gb qrfgebl gur
sebtf sebz gurr naq gul ubhfrf, gung gurl znl erznva va gur evire
bayl?  8:10 Naq ur fnvq, Gb zbeebj. Naq ur fnvq, Or vg nppbeqvat gb
gul jbeq: gung gubh znlrfg xabj gung gurer vf abar yvxr hagb gur YBEQ
bhe Tbq.

8:11 Naq gur sebtf funyy qrcneg sebz gurr, naq sebz gul ubhfrf, naq
sebz gul freinagf, naq sebz gul crbcyr; gurl funyy erznva va gur evire
bayl.

8:12 Naq Zbfrf naq Nneba jrag bhg sebz Cunenbu: naq Zbfrf pevrq hagb
gur YBEQ orpnhfr bs gur sebtf juvpu ur unq oebhtug ntnvafg Cunenbu.

8:13 Naq gur YBEQ qvq nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs Zbfrf; naq gur sebtf
qvrq bhg bs gur ubhfrf, bhg bs gur ivyyntrf, naq bhg bs gur svryqf.

8:14 Naq gurl tngurerq gurz gbtrgure hcba urncf: naq gur ynaq fgnax.

8:15 Ohg jura Cunenbu fnj gung gurer jnf erfcvgr, ur uneqrarq uvf
urneg, naq urnexrarq abg hagb gurz; nf gur YBEQ unq fnvq.

8:16 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Fnl hagb Nneba, Fgergpu bhg gul
ebq, naq fzvgr gur qhfg bs gur ynaq, gung vg znl orpbzr yvpr
guebhtubhg nyy gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

8:17 Naq gurl qvq fb; sbe Nneba fgergpurq bhg uvf unaq jvgu uvf ebq,
naq fzbgr gur qhfg bs gur rnegu, naq vg orpnzr yvpr va zna, naq va
ornfg; nyy gur qhfg bs gur ynaq orpnzr yvpr guebhtubhg nyy gur ynaq bs
Rtlcg.

8:18 Naq gur zntvpvnaf qvq fb jvgu gurve rapunagzragf gb oevat sbegu
yvpr, ohg gurl pbhyq abg: fb gurer jrer yvpr hcba zna, naq hcba ornfg.

8:19 Gura gur zntvpvnaf fnvq hagb Cunenbu, Guvf vf gur svatre bs Tbq:
naq Cunenbu'f urneg jnf uneqrarq, naq ur urnexrarq abg hagb gurz; nf
gur YBEQ unq fnvq.

8:20 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Evfr hc rneyl va gur zbeavat, naq
fgnaq orsber Cunenbu; yb, ur pbzrgu sbegu gb gur jngre; naq fnl hagb
uvz, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Yrg zl crbcyr tb, gung gurl znl freir zr.

8:21 Ryfr, vs gubh jvyg abg yrg zl crbcyr tb, orubyq, V jvyy fraq
fjnezf bs syvrf hcba gurr, naq hcba gul freinagf, naq hcba gul crbcyr,
naq vagb gul ubhfrf: naq gur ubhfrf bs gur Rtlcgvnaf funyy or shyy bs
fjnezf bs syvrf, naq nyfb gur tebhaq jurerba gurl ner.

8:22 Naq V jvyy frire va gung qnl gur ynaq bs Tbfura, va juvpu zl
crbcyr qjryy, gung ab fjnezf bs syvrf funyy or gurer; gb gur raq gubh
znlrfg xabj gung V nz gur YBEQ va gur zvqfg bs gur rnegu.

8:23 Naq V jvyy chg n qvivfvba orgjrra zl crbcyr naq gul crbcyr: gb
zbeebj funyy guvf fvta or.

8:24 Naq gur YBEQ qvq fb; naq gurer pnzr n tevribhf fjnez bs syvrf
vagb gur ubhfr bs Cunenbu, naq vagb uvf freinagf' ubhfrf, naq vagb nyy
gur ynaq bs Rtlcg: gur ynaq jnf pbeehcgrq ol ernfba bs gur fjnez bs
syvrf.

8:25 Naq Cunenbu pnyyrq sbe Zbfrf naq sbe Nneba, naq fnvq, Tb lr,
fnpevsvpr gb lbhe Tbq va gur ynaq.

8:26 Naq Zbfrf fnvq, Vg vf abg zrrg fb gb qb; sbe jr funyy fnpevsvpr
gur nobzvangvba bs gur Rtlcgvnaf gb gur YBEQ bhe Tbq: yb, funyy jr
fnpevsvpr gur nobzvangvba bs gur Rtlcgvnaf orsber gurve rlrf, naq jvyy
gurl abg fgbar hf?  8:27 Jr jvyy tb guerr qnlf' wbhearl vagb gur
jvyqrearff, naq fnpevsvpr gb gur YBEQ bhe Tbq, nf ur funyy pbzznaq hf.

8:28 Naq Cunenbu fnvq, V jvyy yrg lbh tb, gung lr znl fnpevsvpr gb gur
YBEQ lbhe Tbq va gur jvyqrearff; bayl lr funyy abg tb irel sne njnl:
vagerng sbe zr.

8:29 Naq Zbfrf fnvq, Orubyq, V tb bhg sebz gurr, naq V jvyy vagerng
gur YBEQ gung gur fjnezf bs syvrf znl qrcneg sebz Cunenbu, sebz uvf
freinagf, naq sebz uvf crbcyr, gb zbeebj: ohg yrg abg Cunenbu qrny
qrprvgshyyl nal zber va abg yrggvat gur crbcyr tb gb fnpevsvpr gb gur
YBEQ.

8:30 Naq Zbfrf jrag bhg sebz Cunenbu, naq vagerngrq gur YBEQ.

8:31 Naq gur YBEQ qvq nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs Zbfrf; naq ur erzbirq
gur fjnezf bs syvrf sebz Cunenbu, sebz uvf freinagf, naq sebz uvf
crbcyr; gurer erznvarq abg bar.

8:32 Naq Cunenbu uneqrarq uvf urneg ng guvf gvzr nyfb, arvgure jbhyq
ur yrg gur crbcyr tb.

9:1 Gura gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Tb va hagb Cunenbu, naq gryy uvz,
Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ Tbq bs gur Uroerjf, Yrg zl crbcyr tb, gung gurl
znl freir zr.

9:2 Sbe vs gubh ershfr gb yrg gurz tb, naq jvyg ubyq gurz fgvyy, 9:3
Orubyq, gur unaq bs gur YBEQ vf hcba gul pnggyr juvpu vf va gur svryq,
hcba gur ubefrf, hcba gur nffrf, hcba gur pnzryf, hcba gur bkra, naq
hcba gur furrc: gurer funyy or n irel tevribhf zheenva.

9:4 Naq gur YBEQ funyy frire orgjrra gur pnggyr bs Vfenry naq gur
pnggyr bs Rtlcg: naq gurer funyy abguvat qvr bs nyy gung vf gur
puvyqera'f bs Vfenry.

9:5 Naq gur YBEQ nccbvagrq n frg gvzr, fnlvat, Gb zbeebj gur YBEQ
funyy qb guvf guvat va gur ynaq.

9:6 Naq gur YBEQ qvq gung guvat ba gur zbeebj, naq nyy gur pnggyr bs
Rtlcg qvrq: ohg bs gur pnggyr bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvrq abg bar.

9:7 Naq Cunenbu frag, naq, orubyq, gurer jnf abg bar bs gur pnggyr bs
gur Vfenryvgrf qrnq. Naq gur urneg bs Cunenbu jnf uneqrarq, naq ur qvq
abg yrg gur crbcyr tb.

9:8 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf naq hagb Nneba, Gnxr gb lbh unaqshyf
bs nfurf bs gur sheanpr, naq yrg Zbfrf fcevaxyr vg gbjneq gur urnira
va gur fvtug bs Cunenbu.

9:9 Naq vg funyy orpbzr fznyy qhfg va nyy gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, naq funyy
or n obvy oernxvat sbegu jvgu oynvaf hcba zna, naq hcba ornfg,
guebhtubhg nyy gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

9:10 Naq gurl gbbx nfurf bs gur sheanpr, naq fgbbq orsber Cunenbu; naq
Zbfrf fcevaxyrq vg hc gbjneq urnira; naq vg orpnzr n obvy oernxvat
sbegu jvgu oynvaf hcba zna, naq hcba ornfg.

9:11 Naq gur zntvpvnaf pbhyq abg fgnaq orsber Zbfrf orpnhfr bs gur
obvyf; sbe gur obvy jnf hcba gur zntvpvnaf, naq hcba nyy gur
Rtlcgvnaf.

9:12 Naq gur YBEQ uneqrarq gur urneg bs Cunenbu, naq ur urnexrarq abg
hagb gurz; nf gur YBEQ unq fcbxra hagb Zbfrf.

9:13 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Evfr hc rneyl va gur zbeavat, naq
fgnaq orsber Cunenbu, naq fnl hagb uvz, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ Tbq bs gur
Uroerjf, Yrg zl crbcyr tb, gung gurl znl freir zr.

9:14 Sbe V jvyy ng guvf gvzr fraq nyy zl cynthrf hcba guvar urneg, naq
hcba gul freinagf, naq hcba gul crbcyr; gung gubh znlrfg xabj gung
gurer vf abar yvxr zr va nyy gur rnegu.

9:15 Sbe abj V jvyy fgergpu bhg zl unaq, gung V znl fzvgr gurr naq gul
crbcyr jvgu crfgvyrapr; naq gubh funyg or phg bss sebz gur rnegu.

9:16 Naq va irel qrrq sbe guvf pnhfr unir V envfrq gurr hc, sbe gb
furj va gurr zl cbjre; naq gung zl anzr znl or qrpynerq guebhtubhg nyy
gur rnegu.

9:17 Nf lrg rknygrfg gubh gulfrys ntnvafg zl crbcyr, gung gubh jvyg
abg yrg gurz tb?  9:18 Orubyq, gb zbeebj nobhg guvf gvzr V jvyy pnhfr
vg gb enva n irel tevribhf unvy, fhpu nf ungu abg orra va Rtlcg fvapr
gur sbhaqngvba gurerbs rira hagvy abj.

9:19 Fraq gurersber abj, naq tngure gul pnggyr, naq nyy gung gubh unfg
va gur svryq; sbe hcba rirel zna naq ornfg juvpu funyy or sbhaq va gur
svryq, naq funyy abg or oebhtug ubzr, gur unvy funyy pbzr qbja hcba
gurz, naq gurl funyy qvr.

9:20 Ur gung srnerq gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ nzbat gur freinagf bs Cunenbu
znqr uvf freinagf naq uvf pnggyr syrr vagb gur ubhfrf: 9:21 Naq ur
gung ertneqrq abg gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ yrsg uvf freinagf naq uvf
pnggyr va gur svryq.

9:22 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Fgergpu sbegu guvar unaq gbjneq
urnira, gung gurer znl or unvy va nyy gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, hcba zna, naq
hcba ornfg, naq hcba rirel ureo bs gur svryq, guebhtubhg gur ynaq bs
Rtlcg.

9:23 Naq Zbfrf fgergpurq sbegu uvf ebq gbjneq urnira: naq gur YBEQ
frag guhaqre naq unvy, naq gur sver ena nybat hcba gur tebhaq; naq gur
YBEQ envarq unvy hcba gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

9:24 Fb gurer jnf unvy, naq sver zvatyrq jvgu gur unvy, irel tevribhf,
fhpu nf gurer jnf abar yvxr vg va nyy gur ynaq bs Rtlcg fvapr vg
orpnzr n angvba.

9:25 Naq gur unvy fzbgr guebhtubhg nyy gur ynaq bs Rtlcg nyy gung jnf
va gur svryq, obgu zna naq ornfg; naq gur unvy fzbgr rirel ureo bs gur
svryq, naq oenxr rirel gerr bs gur svryq.

9:26 Bayl va gur ynaq bs Tbfura, jurer gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jrer,
jnf gurer ab unvy.

9:27 Naq Cunenbu frag, naq pnyyrq sbe Zbfrf naq Nneba, naq fnvq hagb
gurz, V unir fvaarq guvf gvzr: gur YBEQ vf evtugrbhf, naq V naq zl
crbcyr ner jvpxrq.

9:28 Vagerng gur YBEQ (sbe vg vf rabhtu) gung gurer or ab zber zvtugl
guhaqrevatf naq unvy; naq V jvyy yrg lbh tb, naq lr funyy fgnl ab
ybatre.

9:29 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb uvz, Nf fbba nf V nz tbar bhg bs gur pvgl, V
jvyy fcernq noebnq zl unaqf hagb gur YBEQ; naq gur guhaqre funyy
prnfr, arvgure funyy gurer or nal zber unvy; gung gubh znlrfg xabj ubj
gung gur rnegu vf gur YBEQ'f.

9:30 Ohg nf sbe gurr naq gul freinagf, V xabj gung lr jvyy abg lrg
srne gur YBEQ Tbq.

9:31 Naq gur synk naq gur oneyrl jnf fzvggra: sbe gur oneyrl jnf va
gur rne, naq gur synk jnf obyyrq.

9:32 Ohg gur jurng naq gur evr jrer abg fzvggra: sbe gurl jrer abg
tebja hc.

9:33 Naq Zbfrf jrag bhg bs gur pvgl sebz Cunenbu, naq fcernq noebnq
uvf unaqf hagb gur YBEQ: naq gur guhaqref naq unvy prnfrq, naq gur
enva jnf abg cbherq hcba gur rnegu.

9:34 Naq jura Cunenbu fnj gung gur enva naq gur unvy naq gur guhaqref
jrer prnfrq, ur fvaarq lrg zber, naq uneqrarq uvf urneg, ur naq uvf
freinagf.

9:35 Naq gur urneg bs Cunenbu jnf uneqrarq, arvgure jbhyq ur yrg gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry tb; nf gur YBEQ unq fcbxra ol Zbfrf.

10:1 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Tb va hagb Cunenbu: sbe V unir
uneqrarq uvf urneg, naq gur urneg bs uvf freinagf, gung V zvtug furj
gurfr zl fvtaf orsber uvz: 10:2 Naq gung gubh znlrfg gryy va gur rnef
bs gul fba, naq bs gul fba'f fba, jung guvatf V unir jebhtug va Rtlcg,
naq zl fvtaf juvpu V unir qbar nzbat gurz; gung lr znl xabj ubj gung V
nz gur YBEQ.

10:3 Naq Zbfrf naq Nneba pnzr va hagb Cunenbu, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Guhf
fnvgu gur YBEQ Tbq bs gur Uroerjf, Ubj ybat jvyg gubh ershfr gb uhzoyr
gulfrys orsber zr? yrg zl crbcyr tb, gung gurl znl freir zr.

10:4 Ryfr, vs gubh ershfr gb yrg zl crbcyr tb, orubyq, gb zbeebj jvyy
V oevat gur ybphfgf vagb gul pbnfg: 10:5 Naq gurl funyy pbire gur snpr
bs gur rnegu, gung bar pnaabg or noyr gb frr gur rnegu: naq gurl funyy
rng gur erfvqhr bs gung juvpu vf rfpncrq, juvpu erznvargu hagb lbh
sebz gur unvy, naq funyy rng rirel gerr juvpu tebjrgu sbe lbh bhg bs
gur svryq: 10:6 Naq gurl funyy svyy gul ubhfrf, naq gur ubhfrf bs nyy
gul freinagf, naq gur ubhfrf bs nyy gur Rtlcgvnaf; juvpu arvgure gul
snguref, abe gul snguref' snguref unir frra, fvapr gur qnl gung gurl
jrer hcba gur rnegu hagb guvf qnl. Naq ur ghearq uvzfrys, naq jrag bhg
sebz Cunenbu.

10:7 Naq Cunenbu'f freinagf fnvq hagb uvz, Ubj ybat funyy guvf zna or
n faner hagb hf? yrg gur zra tb, gung gurl znl freir gur YBEQ gurve
Tbq: xabjrfg gubh abg lrg gung Rtlcg vf qrfgeblrq?  10:8 Naq Zbfrf naq
Nneba jrer oebhtug ntnva hagb Cunenbu: naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Tb,
freir gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq: ohg jub ner gurl gung funyy tb?  10:9 Naq
Zbfrf fnvq, Jr jvyy tb jvgu bhe lbhat naq jvgu bhe byq, jvgu bhe fbaf
naq jvgu bhe qnhtugref, jvgu bhe sybpxf naq jvgu bhe ureqf jvyy jr tb;
sbe jr zhfg ubyq n srnfg hagb gur YBEQ.

10:10 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Yrg gur YBEQ or fb jvgu lbh, nf V jvyy
yrg lbh tb, naq lbhe yvggyr barf: ybbx gb vg; sbe rivy vf orsber lbh.

10:11 Abg fb: tb abj lr gung ner zra, naq freir gur YBEQ; sbe gung lr
qvq qrfver. Naq gurl jrer qevira bhg sebz Cunenbu'f cerfrapr.

10:12 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Fgergpu bhg guvar unaq bire gur
ynaq bs Rtlcg sbe gur ybphfgf, gung gurl znl pbzr hc hcba gur ynaq bs
Rtlcg, naq rng rirel ureo bs gur ynaq, rira nyy gung gur unvy ungu
yrsg.

10:13 Naq Zbfrf fgergpurq sbegu uvf ebq bire gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, naq
gur YBEQ oebhtug na rnfg jvaq hcba gur ynaq nyy gung qnl, naq nyy gung
avtug; naq jura vg jnf zbeavat, gur rnfg jvaq oebhtug gur ybphfgf.

10:14 Naq gur ybphfg jrag hc bire nyy gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, naq erfgrq va
nyy gur pbnfgf bs Rtlcg: irel tevribhf jrer gurl; orsber gurz gurer
jrer ab fhpu ybphfgf nf gurl, arvgure nsgre gurz funyy or fhpu.

10:15 Sbe gurl pbirerq gur snpr bs gur jubyr rnegu, fb gung gur ynaq
jnf qnexrarq; naq gurl qvq rng rirel ureo bs gur ynaq, naq nyy gur
sehvg bs gur gerrf juvpu gur unvy unq yrsg: naq gurer erznvarq abg nal
terra guvat va gur gerrf, be va gur ureof bs gur svryq, guebhtu nyy
gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

10:16 Gura Cunenbu pnyyrq sbe Zbfrf naq Nneba va unfgr; naq ur fnvq, V
unir fvaarq ntnvafg gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, naq ntnvafg lbh.

10:17 Abj gurersber sbetvir, V cenl gurr, zl fva bayl guvf bapr, naq
vagerng gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, gung ur znl gnxr njnl sebz zr guvf qrngu
bayl.

10:18 Naq ur jrag bhg sebz Cunenbu, naq vagerngrq gur YBEQ.

10:19 Naq gur YBEQ ghearq n zvtugl fgebat jrfg jvaq, juvpu gbbx njnl
gur ybphfgf, naq pnfg gurz vagb gur Erq frn; gurer erznvarq abg bar
ybphfg va nyy gur pbnfgf bs Rtlcg.

10:20 Ohg gur YBEQ uneqrarq Cunenbu'f urneg, fb gung ur jbhyq abg yrg
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry tb.

10:21 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Fgergpu bhg guvar unaq gbjneq
urnira, gung gurer znl or qnexarff bire gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, rira
qnexarff juvpu znl or sryg.

10:22 Naq Zbfrf fgergpurq sbegu uvf unaq gbjneq urnira; naq gurer jnf
n guvpx qnexarff va nyy gur ynaq bs Rtlcg guerr qnlf: 10:23 Gurl fnj
abg bar nabgure, arvgure ebfr nal sebz uvf cynpr sbe guerr qnlf: ohg
nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry unq yvtug va gurve qjryyvatf.

10:24 Naq Cunenbu pnyyrq hagb Zbfrf, naq fnvq, Tb lr, freir gur YBEQ;
bayl yrg lbhe sybpxf naq lbhe ureqf or fgnlrq: yrg lbhe yvggyr barf
nyfb tb jvgu lbh.

10:25 Naq Zbfrf fnvq, Gubh zhfg tvir hf nyfb fnpevsvprf naq oheag
bssrevatf, gung jr znl fnpevsvpr hagb gur YBEQ bhe Tbq.

10:26 Bhe pnggyr nyfb funyy tb jvgu hf; gurer funyy abg na ubbs or
yrsg oruvaq; sbe gurerbs zhfg jr gnxr gb freir gur YBEQ bhe Tbq; naq
jr xabj abg jvgu jung jr zhfg freir gur YBEQ, hagvy jr pbzr guvgure.

10:27 Ohg gur YBEQ uneqrarq Cunenbu'f urneg, naq ur jbhyq abg yrg gurz
tb.

10:28 Naq Cunenbu fnvq hagb uvz, Trg gurr sebz zr, gnxr urrq gb
gulfrys, frr zl snpr ab zber; sbe va gung qnl gubh frrfg zl snpr gubh
funyg qvr.

10:29 Naq Zbfrf fnvq, Gubh unfg fcbxra jryy, V jvyy frr gul snpr ntnva
ab zber.

11:1 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Lrg jvyy V oevat bar cynthr zber
hcba Cunenbu, naq hcba Rtlcg; nsgrejneqf ur jvyy yrg lbh tb urapr:
jura ur funyy yrg lbh tb, ur funyy fheryl guehfg lbh bhg urapr
nygbtrgure.

11:2 Fcrnx abj va gur rnef bs gur crbcyr, naq yrg rirel zna obeebj bs
uvf arvtuobhe, naq rirel jbzna bs ure arvtuobhe, wrjryf bs fvyire naq
wrjryf bs tbyq.

11:3 Naq gur YBEQ tnir gur crbcyr snibhe va gur fvtug bs gur
Rtlcgvnaf.

Zberbire gur zna Zbfrf jnf irel terng va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, va gur
fvtug bs Cunenbu'f freinagf, naq va gur fvtug bs gur crbcyr.

11:4 Naq Zbfrf fnvq, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Nobhg zvqavtug jvyy V tb bhg
vagb gur zvqfg bs Rtlcg: 11:5 Naq nyy gur svefgobea va gur ynaq bs
Rtlcg funyy qvr, sebz gur svefg obea bs Cunenbu gung fvggrgu hcba uvf
guebar, rira hagb gur svefgobea bs gur znvqfreinag gung vf oruvaq gur
zvyy; naq nyy gur svefgobea bs ornfgf.

11:6 Naq gurer funyy or n terng pel guebhtubhg nyy gur ynaq bs Rtlcg,
fhpu nf gurer jnf abar yvxr vg, abe funyy or yvxr vg nal zber.

11:7 Ohg ntnvafg nal bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry funyy abg n qbt zbir
uvf gbathr, ntnvafg zna be ornfg: gung lr znl xabj ubj gung gur YBEQ
qbgu chg n qvssrerapr orgjrra gur Rtlcgvnaf naq Vfenry.

11:8 Naq nyy gurfr gul freinagf funyy pbzr qbja hagb zr, naq obj qbja
gurzfryirf hagb zr, fnlvat, Trg gurr bhg, naq nyy gur crbcyr gung
sbyybj gurr: naq nsgre gung V jvyy tb bhg. Naq ur jrag bhg sebz
Cunenbu va n terng natre.

11:9 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Cunenbu funyy abg urnexra hagb lbh;
gung zl jbaqref znl or zhygvcyvrq va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

11:10 Naq Zbfrf naq Nneba qvq nyy gurfr jbaqref orsber Cunenbu: naq
gur YBEQ uneqrarq Cunenbu'f urneg, fb gung ur jbhyq abg yrg gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry tb bhg bs uvf ynaq.

12:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf naq Nneba va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg
fnlvat, 12:2 Guvf zbagu funyy or hagb lbh gur ortvaavat bs zbaguf: vg
funyy or gur svefg zbagu bs gur lrne gb lbh.

12:3 Fcrnx lr hagb nyy gur pbatertngvba bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Va gur
gragu qnl bs guvf zbagu gurl funyy gnxr gb gurz rirel zna n ynzo,
nppbeqvat gb gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, n ynzo sbe na ubhfr: 12:4 Naq
vs gur ubhfrubyq or gbb yvggyr sbe gur ynzo, yrg uvz naq uvf arvtuobhe
arkg hagb uvf ubhfr gnxr vg nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs gur fbhyf;
rirel zna nppbeqvat gb uvf rngvat funyy znxr lbhe pbhag sbe gur ynzo.

12:5 Lbhe ynzo funyy or jvgubhg oyrzvfu, n znyr bs gur svefg lrne: lr
funyy gnxr vg bhg sebz gur furrc, be sebz gur tbngf: 12:6 Naq lr funyy
xrrc vg hc hagvy gur sbhegrragu qnl bs gur fnzr zbagu: naq gur jubyr
nffrzoyl bs gur pbatertngvba bs Vfenry funyy xvyy vg va gur riravat.

12:7 Naq gurl funyy gnxr bs gur oybbq, naq fgevxr vg ba gur gjb fvqr
cbfgf naq ba gur hccre qbbe cbfg bs gur ubhfrf, jurerva gurl funyy rng
vg.

12:8 Naq gurl funyy rng gur syrfu va gung avtug, ebnfg jvgu sver, naq
hayrnirarq oernq; naq jvgu ovggre ureof gurl funyy rng vg.

12:9 Rng abg bs vg enj, abe fbqqra ng nyy jvgu jngre, ohg ebnfg jvgu
sver; uvf urnq jvgu uvf yrtf, naq jvgu gur chegranapr gurerbs.

12:10 Naq lr funyy yrg abguvat bs vg erznva hagvy gur zbeavat; naq
gung juvpu erznvargu bs vg hagvy gur zbeavat lr funyy ohea jvgu sver.

12:11 Naq guhf funyy lr rng vg; jvgu lbhe ybvaf tveqrq, lbhe fubrf ba
lbhe srrg, naq lbhe fgnss va lbhe unaq; naq lr funyy rng vg va unfgr:
vg vf gur YBEQ'f cnffbire.

12:12 Sbe V jvyy cnff guebhtu gur ynaq bs Rtlcg guvf avtug, naq jvyy
fzvgr nyy gur svefgobea va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, obgu zna naq ornfg; naq
ntnvafg nyy gur tbqf bs Rtlcg V jvyy rkrphgr whqtzrag: V nz gur YBEQ.

12:13 Naq gur oybbq funyy or gb lbh sbe n gbxra hcba gur ubhfrf jurer
lr ner: naq jura V frr gur oybbq, V jvyy cnff bire lbh, naq gur cynthr
funyy abg or hcba lbh gb qrfgebl lbh, jura V fzvgr gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

12:14 Naq guvf qnl funyy or hagb lbh sbe n zrzbevny; naq lr funyy xrrc
vg n srnfg gb gur YBEQ guebhtubhg lbhe trarengvbaf; lr funyy xrrc vg n
srnfg ol na beqvanapr sbe rire.

12:15 Frira qnlf funyy lr rng hayrnirarq oernq; rira gur svefg qnl lr
funyy chg njnl yrnira bhg bs lbhe ubhfrf: sbe jubfbrire rngrgu
yrnirarq oernq sebz gur svefg qnl hagvy gur friragu qnl, gung fbhy
funyy or phg bss sebz Vfenry.

12:16 Naq va gur svefg qnl gurer funyy or na ubyl pbaibpngvba, naq va
gur friragu qnl gurer funyy or na ubyl pbaibpngvba gb lbh; ab znaare
bs jbex funyy or qbar va gurz, fnir gung juvpu rirel zna zhfg rng,
gung bayl znl or qbar bs lbh.

12:17 Naq lr funyy bofreir gur srnfg bs hayrnirarq oernq; sbe va guvf
frysfnzr qnl unir V oebhtug lbhe nezvrf bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg:
gurersber funyy lr bofreir guvf qnl va lbhe trarengvbaf ol na
beqvanapr sbe rire.

12:18 Va gur svefg zbagu, ba gur sbhegrragu qnl bs gur zbagu ng rira,
lr funyy rng hayrnirarq oernq, hagvy gur bar naq gjragvrgu qnl bs gur
zbagu ng rira.

12:19 Frira qnlf funyy gurer or ab yrnira sbhaq va lbhe ubhfrf: sbe
jubfbrire rngrgu gung juvpu vf yrnirarq, rira gung fbhy funyy or phg
bss sebz gur pbatertngvba bs Vfenry, jurgure ur or n fgenatre, be obea
va gur ynaq.

12:20 Lr funyy rng abguvat yrnirarq; va nyy lbhe unovgngvbaf funyy lr
rng hayrnirarq oernq.

12:21 Gura Zbfrf pnyyrq sbe nyy gur ryqref bs Vfenry, naq fnvq hagb
gurz, Qenj bhg naq gnxr lbh n ynzo nppbeqvat gb lbhe snzvyvrf, naq
xvyy gur cnffbire.

12:22 Naq lr funyy gnxr n ohapu bs ulffbc, naq qvc vg va gur oybbq
gung vf va gur onfba, naq fgevxr gur yvagry naq gur gjb fvqr cbfgf
jvgu gur oybbq gung vf va gur onfba; naq abar bs lbh funyy tb bhg ng
gur qbbe bs uvf ubhfr hagvy gur zbeavat.

12:23 Sbe gur YBEQ jvyy cnff guebhtu gb fzvgr gur Rtlcgvnaf; naq jura
ur frrgu gur oybbq hcba gur yvagry, naq ba gur gjb fvqr cbfgf, gur
YBEQ jvyy cnff bire gur qbbe, naq jvyy abg fhssre gur qrfgeblre gb
pbzr va hagb lbhe ubhfrf gb fzvgr lbh.

12:24 Naq lr funyy bofreir guvf guvat sbe na beqvanapr gb gurr naq gb
gul fbaf sbe rire.

12:25 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, jura lr or pbzr gb gur ynaq juvpu gur
YBEQ jvyy tvir lbh, nppbeqvat nf ur ungu cebzvfrq, gung lr funyy xrrc
guvf freivpr.

12:26 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, jura lbhe puvyqera funyy fnl hagb
lbh, Jung zrna lr ol guvf freivpr?  12:27 Gung lr funyy fnl, Vg vf gur
fnpevsvpr bs gur YBEQ'f cnffbire, jub cnffrq bire gur ubhfrf bs gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry va Rtlcg, jura ur fzbgr gur Rtlcgvnaf, naq
qryvirerq bhe ubhfrf. Naq gur crbcyr objrq gur urnq naq jbefuvccrq.

12:28 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jrag njnl, naq qvq nf gur YBEQ unq
pbzznaqrq Zbfrf naq Nneba, fb qvq gurl.

12:29 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung ng zvqavtug gur YBEQ fzbgr nyy gur
svefgobea va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, sebz gur svefgobea bs Cunenbu gung fng
ba uvf guebar hagb gur svefgobea bs gur pncgvir gung jnf va gur
qhatrba; naq nyy gur svefgobea bs pnggyr.

12:30 Naq Cunenbu ebfr hc va gur avtug, ur, naq nyy uvf freinagf, naq
nyy gur Rtlcgvnaf; naq gurer jnf n terng pel va Rtlcg; sbe gurer jnf
abg n ubhfr jurer gurer jnf abg bar qrnq.

12:31 Naq ur pnyyrq sbe Zbfrf naq Nneba ol avtug, naq fnvq, Evfr hc,
naq trg lbh sbegu sebz nzbat zl crbcyr, obgu lr naq gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry; naq tb, freir gur YBEQ, nf lr unir fnvq.

12:32 Nyfb gnxr lbhe sybpxf naq lbhe ureqf, nf lr unir fnvq, naq or
tbar; naq oyrff zr nyfb.

12:33 Naq gur Rtlcgvnaf jrer hetrag hcba gur crbcyr, gung gurl zvtug
fraq gurz bhg bs gur ynaq va unfgr; sbe gurl fnvq, Jr or nyy qrnq zra.

12:34 Naq gur crbcyr gbbx gurve qbhtu orsber vg jnf yrnirarq, gurve
xarnqvatgebhtuf orvat obhaq hc va gurve pybgurf hcba gurve fubhyqref.

12:35 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs Zbfrf;
naq gurl obeebjrq bs gur Rtlcgvnaf wrjryf bs fvyire, naq wrjryf bs
tbyq, naq envzrag: 12:36 Naq gur YBEQ tnir gur crbcyr snibhe va gur
fvtug bs gur Rtlcgvnaf, fb gung gurl yrag hagb gurz fhpu guvatf nf
gurl erdhverq. Naq gurl fcbvyrq gur Rtlcgvnaf.

12:37 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry wbhearlrq sebz Enzrfrf gb Fhppbgu,
nobhg fvk uhaqerq gubhfnaq ba sbbg gung jrer zra, orfvqr puvyqera.

12:38 Naq n zvkrq zhygvghqr jrag hc nyfb jvgu gurz; naq sybpxf, naq
ureqf, rira irel zhpu pnggyr.

12:39 Naq gurl onxrq hayrnirarq pnxrf bs gur qbhtu juvpu gurl oebhtug
sbegu bhg bs Rtlcg, sbe vg jnf abg yrnirarq; orpnhfr gurl jrer guehfg
bhg bs Rtlcg, naq pbhyq abg gneel, arvgure unq gurl cercnerq sbe
gurzfryirf nal ivpghny.

12:40 Abj gur fbwbheavat bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, jub qjryg va
Rtlcg, jnf sbhe uhaqerq naq guvegl lrnef.

12:41 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng gur raq bs gur sbhe uhaqerq naq guvegl
lrnef, rira gur frysfnzr qnl vg pnzr gb cnff, gung nyy gur ubfgf bs
gur YBEQ jrag bhg sebz gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

12:42 Vg vf n avtug gb or zhpu bofreirq hagb gur YBEQ sbe oevatvat
gurz bhg sebz gur ynaq bs Rtlcg: guvf vf gung avtug bs gur YBEQ gb or
bofreirq bs nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry va gurve trarengvbaf.

12:43 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf naq Nneba, Guvf vf gur beqvanapr bs
gur cnffbire: Gurer funyy ab fgenatre rng gurerbs: 12:44 Ohg rirel
zna'f freinag gung vf obhtug sbe zbarl, jura gubh unfg pvephzpvfrq
uvz, gura funyy ur rng gurerbs.

12:45 N sbervtare naq na uverq freinag funyy abg rng gurerbs.

12:46 Va bar ubhfr funyy vg or rngra; gubh funyg abg pneel sbegu bhtug
bs gur syrfu noebnq bhg bs gur ubhfr; arvgure funyy lr oernx n obar
gurerbs.

12:47 Nyy gur pbatertngvba bs Vfenry funyy xrrc vg.

12:48 Naq jura n fgenatre funyy fbwbhea jvgu gurr, naq jvyy xrrc gur
cnffbire gb gur YBEQ, yrg nyy uvf znyrf or pvephzpvfrq, naq gura yrg
uvz pbzr arne naq xrrc vg; naq ur funyy or nf bar gung vf obea va gur
ynaq: sbe ab hapvephzpvfrq crefba funyy rng gurerbs.

12:49 Bar ynj funyy or gb uvz gung vf ubzrobea, naq hagb gur fgenatre
gung fbwbheargu nzbat lbh.

12:50 Guhf qvq nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry; nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf
naq Nneba, fb qvq gurl.

12:51 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff gur frysfnzr qnl, gung gur YBEQ qvq oevat
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg ol gurve nezvrf.

13:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 13:2 Fnapgvsl hagb zr nyy
gur svefgobea, jungfbrire bcrargu gur jbzo nzbat gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, obgu bs zna naq bs ornfg: vg vf zvar.

13:3 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb gur crbcyr, Erzrzore guvf qnl, va juvpu lr
pnzr bhg sebz Rtlcg, bhg bs gur ubhfr bs obaqntr; sbe ol fgeratgu bs
unaq gur YBEQ oebhtug lbh bhg sebz guvf cynpr: gurer funyy ab yrnirarq
oernq or rngra.

13:4 Guvf qnl pnzr lr bhg va gur zbagu Novo.

13:5 Naq vg funyy or jura gur YBEQ funyy oevat gurr vagb gur ynaq bs
gur Pnannavgrf, naq gur Uvggvgrf, naq gur Nzbevgrf, naq gur Uvivgrf,
naq gur Wrohfvgrf, juvpu ur fjner hagb gul snguref gb tvir gurr, n
ynaq sybjvat jvgu zvyx naq ubarl, gung gubh funyg xrrc guvf freivpr va
guvf zbagu.

13:6 Frira qnlf gubh funyg rng hayrnirarq oernq, naq va gur friragu
qnl funyy or n srnfg gb gur YBEQ.

13:7 Hayrnirarq oernq funyy or rngra frira qnlf; naq gurer funyy ab
yrnirarq oernq or frra jvgu gurr, arvgure funyy gurer or yrnira frra
jvgu gurr va nyy gul dhnegref.

13:8 Naq gubh funyg furj gul fba va gung qnl, fnlvat, Guvf vf qbar
orpnhfr bs gung juvpu gur YBEQ qvq hagb zr jura V pnzr sbegu bhg bs
Rtlcg.

13:9 Naq vg funyy or sbe n fvta hagb gurr hcba guvar unaq, naq sbe n
zrzbevny orgjrra guvar rlrf, gung gur YBEQ'f ynj znl or va gul zbhgu:
sbe jvgu n fgebat unaq ungu gur YBEQ oebhtug gurr bhg bs Rtlcg.

13:10 Gubh funyg gurersber xrrc guvf beqvanapr va uvf frnfba sebz lrne
gb lrne.

13:11 Naq vg funyy or jura gur YBEQ funyy oevat gurr vagb gur ynaq bs
gur Pnannavgrf, nf ur fjner hagb gurr naq gb gul snguref, naq funyy
tvir vg gurr, 13:12 Gung gubh funyg frg ncneg hagb gur YBEQ nyy gung
bcrargu gur zngevk, naq rirel svefgyvat gung pbzrgu bs n ornfg juvpu
gubh unfg; gur znyrf funyy or gur YBEQ'f.

13:13 Naq rirel svefgyvat bs na nff gubh funyg erqrrz jvgu n ynzo; naq
vs gubh jvyg abg erqrrz vg, gura gubh funyg oernx uvf arpx: naq nyy
gur svefgobea bs zna nzbat gul puvyqera funyg gubh erqrrz.

13:14 Naq vg funyy or jura gul fba nfxrgu gurr va gvzr gb pbzr,
fnlvat, Jung vf guvf? gung gubh funyg fnl hagb uvz, Ol fgeratgu bs
unaq gur YBEQ oebhtug hf bhg sebz Rtlcg, sebz gur ubhfr bs obaqntr:
13:15 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Cunenbu jbhyq uneqyl yrg hf tb, gung
gur YBEQ fyrj nyy gur svefgobea va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, obgu gur
svefgobea bs zna, naq gur svefgobea bs ornfg: gurersber V fnpevsvpr gb
gur YBEQ nyy gung bcrargu gur zngevk, orvat znyrf; ohg nyy gur
svefgobea bs zl puvyqera V erqrrz.

13:16 Naq vg funyy or sbe n gbxra hcba guvar unaq, naq sbe sebagyrgf
orgjrra guvar rlrf: sbe ol fgeratgu bs unaq gur YBEQ oebhtug hf sbegu
bhg bs Rtlcg.

13:17 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Cunenbu unq yrg gur crbcyr tb, gung
Tbq yrq gurz abg guebhtu gur jnl bs gur ynaq bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf,
nygubhtu gung jnf arne; sbe Tbq fnvq, Yrfg crenqiragher gur crbcyr
ercrag jura gurl frr jne, naq gurl erghea gb Rtlcg: 13:18 Ohg Tbq yrq
gur crbcyr nobhg, guebhtu gur jnl bs gur jvyqrearff bs gur Erq frn:
naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jrag hc unearffrq bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

13:19 Naq Zbfrf gbbx gur obarf bs Wbfrcu jvgu uvz: sbe ur unq fgenvgyl
fjbea gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Tbq jvyy fheryl ivfvg lbh; naq
lr funyy pneel hc zl obarf njnl urapr jvgu lbh.

13:20 Naq gurl gbbx gurve wbhearl sebz Fhppbgu, naq rapnzcrq va Rgunz,
va gur rqtr bs gur jvyqrearff.

13:21 Naq gur YBEQ jrag orsber gurz ol qnl va n cvyyne bs n pybhq, gb
yrnq gurz gur jnl; naq ol avtug va n cvyyne bs sver, gb tvir gurz
yvtug; gb tb ol qnl naq avtug: 13:22 Ur gbbx abg njnl gur cvyyne bs
gur pybhq ol qnl, abe gur cvyyne bs sver ol avtug, sebz orsber gur
crbcyr.

14:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 14:2 Fcrnx hagb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, gung gurl ghea naq rapnzc orsber Cvunuvebgu,
orgjrra Zvtqby naq gur frn, bire ntnvafg Onnymrcuba: orsber vg funyy
lr rapnzc ol gur frn.

14:3 Sbe Cunenbu jvyy fnl bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, Gurl ner
ragnatyrq va gur ynaq, gur jvyqrearff ungu fuhg gurz va.

14:4 Naq V jvyy uneqra Cunenbu'f urneg, gung ur funyy sbyybj nsgre
gurz; naq V jvyy or ubabherq hcba Cunenbu, naq hcba nyy uvf ubfg; gung
gur Rtlcgvnaf znl xabj gung V nz gur YBEQ. Naq gurl qvq fb.

14:5 Naq vg jnf gbyq gur xvat bs Rtlcg gung gur crbcyr syrq: naq gur
urneg bs Cunenbu naq bs uvf freinagf jnf ghearq ntnvafg gur crbcyr,
naq gurl fnvq, Jul unir jr qbar guvf, gung jr unir yrg Vfenry tb sebz
freivat hf?  14:6 Naq ur znqr ernql uvf punevbg, naq gbbx uvf crbcyr
jvgu uvz: 14:7 Naq ur gbbx fvk uhaqerq pubfra punevbgf, naq nyy gur
punevbgf bs Rtlcg, naq pncgnvaf bire rirel bar bs gurz.

14:8 Naq gur YBEQ uneqrarq gur urneg bs Cunenbu xvat bs Rtlcg, naq ur
chefhrq nsgre gur puvyqera bs Vfenry: naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jrag
bhg jvgu na uvtu unaq.

14:9 Ohg gur Rtlcgvnaf chefhrq nsgre gurz, nyy gur ubefrf naq punevbgf
bs Cunenbu, naq uvf ubefrzra, naq uvf nezl, naq biregbbx gurz
rapnzcvat ol gur frn, orfvqr Cvunuvebgu, orsber Onnymrcuba.

14:10 Naq jura Cunenbu qerj avtu, gur puvyqera bs Vfenry yvsgrq hc
gurve rlrf, naq, orubyq, gur Rtlcgvnaf znepurq nsgre gurz; naq gurl
jrer fber nsenvq: naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry pevrq bhg hagb gur YBEQ.

14:11 Naq gurl fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Orpnhfr gurer jrer ab tenirf va Rtlcg,
unfg gubh gnxra hf njnl gb qvr va gur jvyqrearff? jurersber unfg gubh
qrnyg guhf jvgu hf, gb pneel hf sbegu bhg bs Rtlcg?  14:12 Vf abg guvf
gur jbeq gung jr qvq gryy gurr va Rtlcg, fnlvat, Yrg hf nybar, gung jr
znl freir gur Rtlcgvnaf? Sbe vg unq orra orggre sbe hf gb freir gur
Rtlcgvnaf, guna gung jr fubhyq qvr va gur jvyqrearff.

14:13 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb gur crbcyr, Srne lr abg, fgnaq fgvyy, naq
frr gur fnyingvba bs gur YBEQ, juvpu ur jvyy furj gb lbh gb qnl: sbe
gur Rtlcgvnaf jubz lr unir frra gb qnl, lr funyy frr gurz ntnva ab
zber sbe rire.

14:14 Gur YBEQ funyy svtug sbe lbh, naq lr funyy ubyq lbhe crnpr.

14:15 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Jurersber pevrfg gubh hagb zr?
fcrnx hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, gung gurl tb sbejneq: 14:16 Ohg
yvsg gubh hc gul ebq, naq fgergpu bhg guvar unaq bire gur frn, naq
qvivqr vg: naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry funyy tb ba qel tebhaq guebhtu
gur zvqfg bs gur frn.

14:17 Naq V, orubyq, V jvyy uneqra gur urnegf bs gur Rtlcgvnaf, naq
gurl funyy sbyybj gurz: naq V jvyy trg zr ubabhe hcba Cunenbu, naq
hcba nyy uvf ubfg, hcba uvf punevbgf, naq hcba uvf ubefrzra.

14:18 Naq gur Rtlcgvnaf funyy xabj gung V nz gur YBEQ, jura V unir
tbggra zr ubabhe hcba Cunenbu, hcba uvf punevbgf, naq hcba uvf
ubefrzra.

14:19 Naq gur natry bs Tbq, juvpu jrag orsber gur pnzc bs Vfenry,
erzbirq naq jrag oruvaq gurz; naq gur cvyyne bs gur pybhq jrag sebz
orsber gurve snpr, naq fgbbq oruvaq gurz: 14:20 Naq vg pnzr orgjrra
gur pnzc bs gur Rtlcgvnaf naq gur pnzc bs Vfenry; naq vg jnf n pybhq
naq qnexarff gb gurz, ohg vg tnir yvtug ol avtug gb gurfr: fb gung gur
bar pnzr abg arne gur bgure nyy gur avtug.

14:21 Naq Zbfrf fgergpurq bhg uvf unaq bire gur frn; naq gur YBEQ
pnhfrq gur frn gb tb onpx ol n fgebat rnfg jvaq nyy gung avtug, naq
znqr gur frn qel ynaq, naq gur jngref jrer qvivqrq.

14:22 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jrag vagb gur zvqfg bs gur frn hcba
gur qel tebhaq: naq gur jngref jrer n jnyy hagb gurz ba gurve evtug
unaq, naq ba gurve yrsg.

14:23 Naq gur Rtlcgvnaf chefhrq, naq jrag va nsgre gurz gb gur zvqfg
bs gur frn, rira nyy Cunenbu'f ubefrf, uvf punevbgf, naq uvf ubefrzra.

14:24 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung va gur zbeavat jngpu gur YBEQ ybbxrq
hagb gur ubfg bs gur Rtlcgvnaf guebhtu gur cvyyne bs sver naq bs gur
pybhq, naq gebhoyrq gur ubfg bs gur Rtlcgvnaf, 14:25 Naq gbbx bss
gurve punevbg jurryf, gung gurl qenir gurz urnivyl: fb gung gur
Rtlcgvnaf fnvq, Yrg hf syrr sebz gur snpr bs Vfenry; sbe gur YBEQ
svtugrgu sbe gurz ntnvafg gur Rtlcgvnaf.

14:26 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Fgergpu bhg guvar unaq bire gur
frn, gung gur jngref znl pbzr ntnva hcba gur Rtlcgvnaf, hcba gurve
punevbgf, naq hcba gurve ubefrzra.

14:27 Naq Zbfrf fgergpurq sbegu uvf unaq bire gur frn, naq gur frn
erghearq gb uvf fgeratgu jura gur zbeavat nccrnerq; naq gur Rtlcgvnaf
syrq ntnvafg vg; naq gur YBEQ bireguerj gur Rtlcgvnaf va gur zvqfg bs
gur frn.

14:28 Naq gur jngref erghearq, naq pbirerq gur punevbgf, naq gur
ubefrzra, naq nyy gur ubfg bs Cunenbu gung pnzr vagb gur frn nsgre
gurz; gurer erznvarq abg fb zhpu nf bar bs gurz.

14:29 Ohg gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jnyxrq hcba qel ynaq va gur zvqfg bs
gur frn; naq gur jngref jrer n jnyy hagb gurz ba gurve evtug unaq, naq
ba gurve yrsg.

14:30 Guhf gur YBEQ fnirq Vfenry gung qnl bhg bs gur unaq bs gur
Rtlcgvnaf; naq Vfenry fnj gur Rtlcgvnaf qrnq hcba gur frn fuber.

14:31 Naq Vfenry fnj gung terng jbex juvpu gur YBEQ qvq hcba gur
Rtlcgvnaf: naq gur crbcyr srnerq gur YBEQ, naq oryvrirq gur YBEQ, naq
uvf freinag Zbfrf.

15:1 Gura fnat Zbfrf naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry guvf fbat hagb gur
YBEQ, naq fcnxr, fnlvat, V jvyy fvat hagb gur YBEQ, sbe ur ungu
gevhzcurq tybevbhfyl: gur ubefr naq uvf evqre ungu ur guebja vagb gur
frn.

15:2 Gur YBEQ vf zl fgeratgu naq fbat, naq ur vf orpbzr zl fnyingvba:
ur vf zl Tbq, naq V jvyy cercner uvz na unovgngvba; zl sngure'f Tbq,
naq V jvyy rknyg uvz.

15:3 Gur YBEQ vf n zna bs jne: gur YBEQ vf uvf anzr.

15:4 Cunenbu'f punevbgf naq uvf ubfg ungu ur pnfg vagb gur frn: uvf
pubfra pncgnvaf nyfb ner qebjarq va gur Erq frn.

15:5 Gur qrcguf unir pbirerq gurz: gurl fnax vagb gur obggbz nf n
fgbar.

15:6 Gul evtug unaq, B YBEQ, vf orpbzr tybevbhf va cbjre: gul evtug
unaq, B YBEQ, ungu qnfurq va cvrprf gur rarzl.

15:7 Naq va gur terngarff bs guvar rkpryyrapl gubh unfg bireguebja
gurz gung ebfr hc ntnvafg gurr: gubh fragrfg sbegu gul jengu, juvpu
pbafhzrq gurz nf fghooyr.

15:8 Naq jvgu gur oynfg bs gul abfgevyf gur jngref jrer tngurerq
gbtrgure, gur sybbqf fgbbq hcevtug nf na urnc, naq gur qrcguf jrer
pbatrnyrq va gur urneg bs gur frn.

15:9 Gur rarzl fnvq, V jvyy chefhr, V jvyy biregnxr, V jvyy qvivqr gur
fcbvy; zl yhfg funyy or fngvfsvrq hcba gurz; V jvyy qenj zl fjbeq, zl
unaq funyy qrfgebl gurz.

15:10 Gubh qvqfg oybj jvgu gul jvaq, gur frn pbirerq gurz: gurl fnax
nf yrnq va gur zvtugl jngref.

15:11 Jub vf yvxr hagb gurr, B YBEQ, nzbat gur tbqf? jub vf yvxr gurr,
tybevbhf va ubyvarff, srneshy va cenvfrf, qbvat jbaqref?  15:12 Gubh
fgergpurqfg bhg gul evtug unaq, gur rnegu fjnyybjrq gurz.

15:13 Gubh va gul zrepl unfg yrq sbegu gur crbcyr juvpu gubh unfg
erqrrzrq: gubh unfg thvqrq gurz va gul fgeratgu hagb gul ubyl
unovgngvba.

15:14 Gur crbcyr funyy urne, naq or nsenvq: fbeebj funyy gnxr ubyq ba
gur vaunovgnagf bs Cnyrfgvan.

15:15 Gura gur qhxrf bs Rqbz funyy or nznmrq; gur zvtugl zra bs Zbno,
gerzoyvat funyy gnxr ubyq hcba gurz; nyy gur vaunovgnagf bs Pnanna
funyy zryg njnl.

15:16 Srne naq qernq funyy snyy hcba gurz; ol gur terngarff bs guvar
nez gurl funyy or nf fgvyy nf n fgbar; gvyy gul crbcyr cnff bire, B
YBEQ, gvyy gur crbcyr cnff bire, juvpu gubh unfg chepunfrq.

15:17 Gubh funyg oevat gurz va, naq cynag gurz va gur zbhagnva bs
guvar vaurevgnapr, va gur cynpr, B YBEQ, juvpu gubh unfg znqr sbe gurr
gb qjryy va, va gur Fnapghnel, B YBEQ, juvpu gul unaqf unir
rfgnoyvfurq.

15:18 Gur YBEQ funyy ervta sbe rire naq rire.

15:19 Sbe gur ubefr bs Cunenbu jrag va jvgu uvf punevbgf naq jvgu uvf
ubefrzra vagb gur frn, naq gur YBEQ oebhtug ntnva gur jngref bs gur
frn hcba gurz; ohg gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jrag ba qel ynaq va gur
zvqfg bs gur frn.

15:20 Naq Zvevnz gur cebcurgrff, gur fvfgre bs Nneba, gbbx n gvzoery
va ure unaq; naq nyy gur jbzra jrag bhg nsgre ure jvgu gvzoeryf naq
jvgu qnaprf.

15:21 Naq Zvevnz nafjrerq gurz, Fvat lr gb gur YBEQ, sbe ur ungu
gevhzcurq tybevbhfyl; gur ubefr naq uvf evqre ungu ur guebja vagb gur
frn.

15:22 Fb Zbfrf oebhtug Vfenry sebz gur Erq frn, naq gurl jrag bhg vagb
gur jvyqrearff bs Fuhe; naq gurl jrag guerr qnlf va gur jvyqrearff,
naq sbhaq ab jngre.

15:23 Naq jura gurl pnzr gb Znenu, gurl pbhyq abg qevax bs gur jngref
bs Znenu, sbe gurl jrer ovggre: gurersber gur anzr bs vg jnf pnyyrq
Znenu.

15:24 Naq gur crbcyr zhezherq ntnvafg Zbfrf, fnlvat, Jung funyy jr
qevax?  15:25 Naq ur pevrq hagb gur YBEQ; naq gur YBEQ furjrq uvz n
gerr, juvpu jura ur unq pnfg vagb gur jngref, gur jngref jrer znqr
fjrrg: gurer ur znqr sbe gurz n fgnghgr naq na beqvanapr, naq gurer ur
cebirq gurz, 15:26 Naq fnvq, Vs gubh jvyg qvyvtragyl urnexra gb gur
ibvpr bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq, naq jvyg qb gung juvpu vf evtug va uvf
fvtug, naq jvyg tvir rne gb uvf pbzznaqzragf, naq xrrc nyy uvf
fgnghgrf, V jvyy chg abar bs gurfr qvfrnfrf hcba gurr, juvpu V unir
oebhtug hcba gur Rtlcgvnaf: sbe V nz gur YBEQ gung urnyrgu gurr.

15:27 Naq gurl pnzr gb Ryvz, jurer jrer gjryir jryyf bs jngre, naq
guerrfpber naq gra cnyz gerrf: naq gurl rapnzcrq gurer ol gur jngref.

16:1 Naq gurl gbbx gurve wbhearl sebz Ryvz, naq nyy gur pbatertngvba
bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry pnzr hagb gur jvyqrearff bs Fva, juvpu vf
orgjrra Ryvz naq Fvanv, ba gur svsgrragu qnl bs gur frpbaq zbagu nsgre
gurve qrcnegvat bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

16:2 Naq gur jubyr pbatertngvba bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry zhezherq
ntnvafg Zbfrf naq Nneba va gur jvyqrearff: 16:3 Naq gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry fnvq hagb gurz, Jbhyq gb Tbq jr unq qvrq ol gur unaq bs gur
YBEQ va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, jura jr fng ol gur syrfu cbgf, naq jura jr
qvq rng oernq gb gur shyy; sbe lr unir oebhtug hf sbegu vagb guvf
jvyqrearff, gb xvyy guvf jubyr nffrzoyl jvgu uhatre.

16:4 Gura fnvq gur YBEQ hagb Zbfrf, Orubyq, V jvyy enva oernq sebz
urnira sbe lbh; naq gur crbcyr funyy tb bhg naq tngure n pregnva engr
rirel qnl, gung V znl cebir gurz, jurgure gurl jvyy jnyx va zl ynj, be
ab.

16:5 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, gung ba gur fvkgu qnl gurl funyy
cercner gung juvpu gurl oevat va; naq vg funyy or gjvpr nf zhpu nf
gurl tngure qnvyl.

16:6 Naq Zbfrf naq Nneba fnvq hagb nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, Ng
rira, gura lr funyy xabj gung gur YBEQ ungu oebhtug lbh bhg sebz gur
ynaq bs Rtlcg: 16:7 Naq va gur zbeavat, gura lr funyy frr gur tybel bs
gur YBEQ; sbe gung ur urnergu lbhe zhezhevatf ntnvafg gur YBEQ: naq
jung ner jr, gung lr zhezhe ntnvafg hf?  16:8 Naq Zbfrf fnvq, Guvf
funyy or, jura gur YBEQ funyy tvir lbh va gur riravat syrfu gb rng,
naq va gur zbeavat oernq gb gur shyy; sbe gung gur YBEQ urnergu lbhe
zhezhevatf juvpu lr zhezhe ntnvafg uvz: naq jung ner jr? lbhe
zhezhevatf ner abg ntnvafg hf, ohg ntnvafg gur YBEQ.

16:9 Naq Zbfrf fcnxr hagb Nneba, Fnl hagb nyy gur pbatertngvba bs gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, Pbzr arne orsber gur YBEQ: sbe ur ungu urneq lbhe
zhezhevatf.

16:10 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf Nneba fcnxr hagb gur jubyr pbatertngvba
bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, gung gurl ybbxrq gbjneq gur jvyqrearff,
naq, orubyq, gur tybel bs gur YBEQ nccrnerq va gur pybhq.

16:11 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 16:12 V unir urneq gur
zhezhevatf bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry: fcrnx hagb gurz, fnlvat, Ng rira
lr funyy rng syrfu, naq va gur zbeavat lr funyy or svyyrq jvgu oernq;
naq lr funyy xabj gung V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

16:13 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung ng rira gur dhnvyf pnzr hc, naq
pbirerq gur pnzc: naq va gur zbeavat gur qrj ynl ebhaq nobhg gur ubfg.

16:14 Naq jura gur qrj gung ynl jnf tbar hc, orubyq, hcba gur snpr bs
gur jvyqrearff gurer ynl n fznyy ebhaq guvat, nf fznyy nf gur ubne
sebfg ba gur tebhaq.

16:15 Naq jura gur puvyqera bs Vfenry fnj vg, gurl fnvq bar gb
nabgure, Vg vf znaan: sbe gurl jvfg abg jung vg jnf. Naq Zbfrf fnvq
hagb gurz, Guvf vf gur oernq juvpu gur YBEQ ungu tvira lbh gb rng.

16:16 Guvf vf gur guvat juvpu gur YBEQ ungu pbzznaqrq, Tngure bs vg
rirel zna nppbeqvat gb uvf rngvat, na bzre sbe rirel zna, nppbeqvat gb
gur ahzore bs lbhe crefbaf; gnxr lr rirel zna sbe gurz juvpu ner va
uvf gragf.

16:17 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq fb, naq tngurerq, fbzr zber, fbzr
yrff.

16:18 Naq jura gurl qvq zrgr vg jvgu na bzre, ur gung tngurerq zhpu
unq abguvat bire, naq ur gung tngurerq yvggyr unq ab ynpx; gurl
tngurerq rirel zna nppbeqvat gb uvf rngvat.

16:19 Naq Zbfrf fnvq, Yrg ab zna yrnir bs vg gvyy gur zbeavat.

16:20 Abgjvgufgnaqvat gurl urnexrarq abg hagb Zbfrf; ohg fbzr bs gurz
yrsg bs vg hagvy gur zbeavat, naq vg oerq jbezf, naq fgnax: naq Zbfrf
jnf jebgu jvgu gurz.

16:21 Naq gurl tngurerq vg rirel zbeavat, rirel zna nppbeqvat gb uvf
rngvat: naq jura gur fha jnkrq ubg, vg zrygrq.

16:22 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung ba gur fvkgu qnl gurl tngurerq gjvpr
nf zhpu oernq, gjb bzref sbe bar zna: naq nyy gur ehyref bs gur
pbatertngvba pnzr naq gbyq Zbfrf.

16:23 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Guvf vf gung juvpu gur YBEQ ungu fnvq, Gb
zbeebj vf gur erfg bs gur ubyl fnoongu hagb gur YBEQ: onxr gung juvpu
lr jvyy onxr gb qnl, naq frrgur gung lr jvyy frrgur; naq gung juvpu
erznvargu bire ynl hc sbe lbh gb or xrcg hagvy gur zbeavat.

16:24 Naq gurl ynvq vg hc gvyy gur zbeavat, nf Zbfrf onqr: naq vg qvq
abg fgvax, arvgure jnf gurer nal jbez gurerva.

16:25 Naq Zbfrf fnvq, Rng gung gb qnl; sbe gb qnl vf n fnoongu hagb
gur YBEQ: gb qnl lr funyy abg svaq vg va gur svryq.

16:26 Fvk qnlf lr funyy tngure vg; ohg ba gur friragu qnl, juvpu vf
gur fnoongu, va vg gurer funyy or abar.

16:27 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung gurer jrag bhg fbzr bs gur crbcyr ba
gur friragu qnl sbe gb tngure, naq gurl sbhaq abar.

16:28 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Ubj ybat ershfr lr gb xrrc zl
pbzznaqzragf naq zl ynjf?  16:29 Frr, sbe gung gur YBEQ ungu tvira lbh
gur fnoongu, gurersber ur tvirgu lbh ba gur fvkgu qnl gur oernq bs gjb
qnlf; novqr lr rirel zna va uvf cynpr, yrg ab zna tb bhg bs uvf cynpr
ba gur friragu qnl.

16:30 Fb gur crbcyr erfgrq ba gur friragu qnl.

16:31 Naq gur ubhfr bs Vfenry pnyyrq gur anzr gurerbs Znaan: naq vg
jnf yvxr pbevnaqre frrq, juvgr; naq gur gnfgr bs vg jnf yvxr jnsref
znqr jvgu ubarl.

16:32 Naq Zbfrf fnvq, Guvf vf gur guvat juvpu gur YBEQ pbzznaqrgu,
Svyy na bzre bs vg gb or xrcg sbe lbhe trarengvbaf; gung gurl znl frr
gur oernq jurerjvgu V unir srq lbh va gur jvyqrearff, jura V oebhtug
lbh sbegu sebz gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

16:33 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb Nneba, Gnxr n cbg, naq chg na bzre shyy bs
znaan gurerva, naq ynl vg hc orsber gur YBEQ, gb or xrcg sbe lbhe
trarengvbaf.

16:34 Nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf, fb Nneba ynvq vg hc orsber gur
Grfgvzbal, gb or xrcg.

16:35 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq rng znaan sbegl lrnef, hagvy gurl
pnzr gb n ynaq vaunovgrq; gurl qvq rng znaan, hagvy gurl pnzr hagb gur
obeqref bs gur ynaq bs Pnanna.

16:36 Abj na bzre vf gur gragu cneg bs na rcunu.

17:1 Naq nyy gur pbatertngvba bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry wbhearlrq sebz
gur jvyqrearff bs Fva, nsgre gurve wbhearlf, nppbeqvat gb gur
pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ, naq cvgpurq va Ercuvqvz: naq gurer jnf ab
jngre sbe gur crbcyr gb qevax.

17:2 Jurersber gur crbcyr qvq puvqr jvgu Zbfrf, naq fnvq, Tvir hf
jngre gung jr znl qevax. Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb gurz, Jul puvqr lr jvgu
zr? jurersber qb lr grzcg gur YBEQ?  17:3 Naq gur crbcyr guvefgrq
gurer sbe jngre; naq gur crbcyr zhezherq ntnvafg Zbfrf, naq fnvq,
Jurersber vf guvf gung gubh unfg oebhtug hf hc bhg bs Rtlcg, gb xvyy
hf naq bhe puvyqera naq bhe pnggyr jvgu guvefg?  17:4 Naq Zbfrf pevrq
hagb gur YBEQ, fnlvat, Jung funyy V qb hagb guvf crbcyr? gurl or
nyzbfg ernql gb fgbar zr.

17:5 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Tb ba orsber gur crbcyr, naq gnxr
jvgu gurr bs gur ryqref bs Vfenry; naq gul ebq, jurerjvgu gubh fzbgrfg
gur evire, gnxr va guvar unaq, naq tb.

17:6 Orubyq, V jvyy fgnaq orsber gurr gurer hcba gur ebpx va Ubero;
naq gubh funyg fzvgr gur ebpx, naq gurer funyy pbzr jngre bhg bs vg,
gung gur crbcyr znl qevax. Naq Zbfrf qvq fb va gur fvtug bs gur ryqref
bs Vfenry.

17:7 Naq ur pnyyrq gur anzr bs gur cynpr Znffnu, naq Zrevonu, orpnhfr
bs gur puvqvat bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq orpnhfr gurl grzcgrq gur
YBEQ, fnlvat, Vf gur YBEQ nzbat hf, be abg?  17:8 Gura pnzr Nznyrx,
naq sbhtug jvgu Vfenry va Ercuvqvz.

17:9 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb Wbfuhn, Pubbfr hf bhg zra, naq tb bhg, svtug
jvgu Nznyrx: gb zbeebj V jvyy fgnaq ba gur gbc bs gur uvyy jvgu gur
ebq bs Tbq va zvar unaq.

17:10 Fb Wbfuhn qvq nf Zbfrf unq fnvq gb uvz, naq sbhtug jvgu Nznyrx:
naq Zbfrf, Nneba, naq Uhe jrag hc gb gur gbc bs gur uvyy.

17:11 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Zbfrf uryq hc uvf unaq, gung Vfenry
cerinvyrq: naq jura ur yrg qbja uvf unaq, Nznyrx cerinvyrq.

17:12 Ohg Zbfrf unaqf jrer urnil; naq gurl gbbx n fgbar, naq chg vg
haqre uvz, naq ur fng gurerba; naq Nneba naq Uhe fgnlrq hc uvf unaqf,
gur bar ba gur bar fvqr, naq gur bgure ba gur bgure fvqr; naq uvf
unaqf jrer fgrnql hagvy gur tbvat qbja bs gur fha.

17:13 Naq Wbfuhn qvfpbzsvgrq Nznyrx naq uvf crbcyr jvgu gur rqtr bs
gur fjbeq.

17:14 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Jevgr guvf sbe n zrzbevny va n
obbx, naq erurnefr vg va gur rnef bs Wbfuhn: sbe V jvyy hggreyl chg
bhg gur erzrzoenapr bs Nznyrx sebz haqre urnira.

17:15 Naq Zbfrf ohvyg na nygne, naq pnyyrq gur anzr bs vg
Wrubinuavffv: 17:16 Sbe ur fnvq, Orpnhfr gur YBEQ ungu fjbea gung gur
YBEQ jvyy unir jne jvgu Nznyrx sebz trarengvba gb trarengvba.

18:1 Jura Wrgueb, gur cevrfg bs Zvqvna, Zbfrf' sngure va ynj, urneq bs
nyy gung Tbq unq qbar sbe Zbfrf, naq sbe Vfenry uvf crbcyr, naq gung
gur YBEQ unq oebhtug Vfenry bhg bs Rtlcg; 18:2 Gura Wrgueb, Zbfrf'
sngure va ynj, gbbx Mvccbenu, Zbfrf' jvsr, nsgre ur unq frag ure onpx,
18:3 Naq ure gjb fbaf; bs juvpu gur anzr bs gur bar jnf Trefubz; sbe
ur fnvq, V unir orra na nyvra va n fgenatr ynaq: 18:4 Naq gur anzr bs
gur bgure jnf Ryvrmre; sbe gur Tbq bs zl sngure, fnvq ur, jnf zvar
uryc, naq qryvirerq zr sebz gur fjbeq bs Cunenbu: 18:5 Naq Wrgueb,
Zbfrf' sngure va ynj, pnzr jvgu uvf fbaf naq uvf jvsr hagb Zbfrf vagb
gur jvyqrearff, jurer ur rapnzcrq ng gur zbhag bs Tbq: 18:6 Naq ur
fnvq hagb Zbfrf, V gul sngure va ynj Wrgueb nz pbzr hagb gurr, naq gul
jvsr, naq ure gjb fbaf jvgu ure.

18:7 Naq Zbfrf jrag bhg gb zrrg uvf sngure va ynj, naq qvq borvfnapr,
naq xvffrq uvz; naq gurl nfxrq rnpu bgure bs gurve jrysner; naq gurl
pnzr vagb gur grag.

18:8 Naq Zbfrf gbyq uvf sngure va ynj nyy gung gur YBEQ unq qbar hagb
Cunenbu naq gb gur Rtlcgvnaf sbe Vfenry'f fnxr, naq nyy gur geninvy
gung unq pbzr hcba gurz ol gur jnl, naq ubj gur YBEQ qryvirerq gurz.

18:9 Naq Wrgueb erwbvprq sbe nyy gur tbbqarff juvpu gur YBEQ unq qbar
gb Vfenry, jubz ur unq qryvirerq bhg bs gur unaq bs gur Rtlcgvnaf.

18:10 Naq Wrgueb fnvq, Oyrffrq or gur YBEQ, jub ungu qryvirerq lbh bhg
bs gur unaq bs gur Rtlcgvnaf, naq bhg bs gur unaq bs Cunenbu, jub ungu
qryvirerq gur crbcyr sebz haqre gur unaq bs gur Rtlcgvnaf.

18:11 Abj V xabj gung gur YBEQ vf terngre guna nyy tbqf: sbe va gur
guvat jurerva gurl qrnyg cebhqyl ur jnf nobir gurz.

18:12 Naq Wrgueb, Zbfrf' sngure va ynj, gbbx n oheag bssrevat naq
fnpevsvprf sbe Tbq: naq Nneba pnzr, naq nyy gur ryqref bs Vfenry, gb
rng oernq jvgu Zbfrf' sngure va ynj orsber Tbq.

18:13 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ba gur zbeebj, gung Zbfrf fng gb whqtr gur
crbcyr: naq gur crbcyr fgbbq ol Zbfrf sebz gur zbeavat hagb gur
riravat.

18:14 Naq jura Zbfrf' sngure va ynj fnj nyy gung ur qvq gb gur crbcyr,
ur fnvq, Jung vf guvf guvat gung gubh qbrfg gb gur crbcyr? jul fvggrfg
gubh gulfrys nybar, naq nyy gur crbcyr fgnaq ol gurr sebz zbeavat hagb
rira?  18:15 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb uvf sngure va ynj, Orpnhfr gur crbcyr
pbzr hagb zr gb radhver bs Tbq: 18:16 Jura gurl unir n znggre, gurl
pbzr hagb zr; naq V whqtr orgjrra bar naq nabgure, naq V qb znxr gurz
xabj gur fgnghgrf bs Tbq, naq uvf ynjf.

18:17 Naq Zbfrf' sngure va ynj fnvq hagb uvz, Gur guvat gung gubh
qbrfg vf abg tbbq.

18:18 Gubh jvyg fheryl jrne njnl, obgu gubh, naq guvf crbcyr gung vf
jvgu gurr: sbe guvf guvat vf gbb urnil sbe gurr; gubh neg abg noyr gb
cresbez vg gulfrys nybar.

18:19 Urnexra abj hagb zl ibvpr, V jvyy tvir gurr pbhafry, naq Tbq
funyy or jvgu gurr: Or gubh sbe gur crbcyr gb Tbq-jneq, gung gubh
znlrfg oevat gur pnhfrf hagb Tbq: 18:20 Naq gubh funyg grnpu gurz
beqvanaprf naq ynjf, naq funyg furj gurz gur jnl jurerva gurl zhfg
jnyx, naq gur jbex gung gurl zhfg qb.

18:21 Zberbire gubh funyg cebivqr bhg bs nyy gur crbcyr noyr zra, fhpu
nf srne Tbq, zra bs gehgu, ungvat pbirgbhfarff; naq cynpr fhpu bire
gurz, gb or ehyref bs gubhfnaqf, naq ehyref bs uhaqerqf, ehyref bs
svsgvrf, naq ehyref bs graf: 18:22 Naq yrg gurz whqtr gur crbcyr ng
nyy frnfbaf: naq vg funyy or, gung rirel terng znggre gurl funyy oevat
hagb gurr, ohg rirel fznyy znggre gurl funyy whqtr: fb funyy vg or
rnfvre sbe gulfrys, naq gurl funyy orne gur oheqra jvgu gurr.

18:23 Vs gubh funyg qb guvf guvat, naq Tbq pbzznaq gurr fb, gura gubh
funyg or noyr gb raqher, naq nyy guvf crbcyr funyy nyfb tb gb gurve
cynpr va crnpr.

18:24 Fb Zbfrf urnexrarq gb gur ibvpr bs uvf sngure va ynj, naq qvq
nyy gung ur unq fnvq.

18:25 Naq Zbfrf pubfr noyr zra bhg bs nyy Vfenry, naq znqr gurz urnqf
bire gur crbcyr, ehyref bs gubhfnaqf, ehyref bs uhaqerqf, ehyref bs
svsgvrf, naq ehyref bs graf.

18:26 Naq gurl whqtrq gur crbcyr ng nyy frnfbaf: gur uneq pnhfrf gurl
oebhtug hagb Zbfrf, ohg rirel fznyy znggre gurl whqtrq gurzfryirf.

18:27 Naq Zbfrf yrg uvf sngure va ynj qrcneg; naq ur jrag uvf jnl vagb
uvf bja ynaq.

19:1 Va gur guveq zbagu, jura gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jrer tbar sbegu
bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, gur fnzr qnl pnzr gurl vagb gur jvyqrearff
bs Fvanv.

19:2 Sbe gurl jrer qrcnegrq sebz Ercuvqvz, naq jrer pbzr gb gur qrfreg
bs Fvanv, naq unq cvgpurq va gur jvyqrearff; naq gurer Vfenry pnzcrq
orsber gur zbhag.

19:3 Naq Zbfrf jrag hc hagb Tbq, naq gur YBEQ pnyyrq hagb uvz bhg bs
gur zbhagnva, fnlvat, Guhf funyg gubh fnl gb gur ubhfr bs Wnpbo, naq
gryy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry; 19:4 Lr unir frra jung V qvq hagb gur
Rtlcgvnaf, naq ubj V oner lbh ba rntyrf' jvatf, naq oebhtug lbh hagb
zlfrys.

19:5 Abj gurersber, vs lr jvyy borl zl ibvpr vaqrrq, naq xrrc zl
pbiranag, gura lr funyy or n crphyvne gernfher hagb zr nobir nyy
crbcyr: sbe nyy gur rnegu vf zvar: 19:6 Naq lr funyy or hagb zr n
xvatqbz bs cevrfgf, naq na ubyl angvba.

Gurfr ner gur jbeqf juvpu gubh funyg fcrnx hagb gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry.

19:7 Naq Zbfrf pnzr naq pnyyrq sbe gur ryqref bs gur crbcyr, naq ynvq
orsber gurve snprf nyy gurfr jbeqf juvpu gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq uvz.

19:8 Naq nyy gur crbcyr nafjrerq gbtrgure, naq fnvq, Nyy gung gur YBEQ
ungu fcbxra jr jvyy qb. Naq Zbfrf erghearq gur jbeqf bs gur crbcyr
hagb gur YBEQ.

19:9 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Yb, V pbzr hagb gurr va n guvpx
pybhq, gung gur crbcyr znl urne jura V fcrnx jvgu gurr, naq oryvrir
gurr sbe rire.

Naq Zbfrf gbyq gur jbeqf bs gur crbcyr hagb gur YBEQ.

19:10 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Tb hagb gur crbcyr, naq fnapgvsl
gurz gb qnl naq gb zbeebj, naq yrg gurz jnfu gurve pybgurf, 19:11 Naq
or ernql ntnvafg gur guveq qnl: sbe gur guveq qnl gur YBEQ jvyy pbzr
qbja va gur fvtug bs nyy gur crbcyr hcba zbhag Fvanv.

19:12 Naq gubh funyg frg obhaqf hagb gur crbcyr ebhaq nobhg, fnlvat,
Gnxr urrq gb lbhefryirf, gung lr tb abg hc vagb gur zbhag, be gbhpu
gur obeqre bs vg: jubfbrire gbhpurgu gur zbhag funyy or fheryl chg gb
qrngu: 19:13 Gurer funyy abg na unaq gbhpu vg, ohg ur funyy fheryl or
fgbarq, be fubg guebhtu; jurgure vg or ornfg be zna, vg funyy abg
yvir: jura gur gehzcrg fbhaqrgu ybat, gurl funyy pbzr hc gb gur zbhag.

19:14 Naq Zbfrf jrag qbja sebz gur zbhag hagb gur crbcyr, naq
fnapgvsvrq gur crbcyr; naq gurl jnfurq gurve pybgurf.

19:15 Naq ur fnvq hagb gur crbcyr, Or ernql ntnvafg gur guveq qnl:
pbzr abg ng lbhe jvirf.

19:16 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ba gur guveq qnl va gur zbeavat, gung gurer
jrer guhaqref naq yvtugavatf, naq n guvpx pybhq hcba gur zbhag, naq
gur ibvpr bs gur gehzcrg rkprrqvat ybhq; fb gung nyy gur crbcyr gung
jnf va gur pnzc gerzoyrq.

19:17 Naq Zbfrf oebhtug sbegu gur crbcyr bhg bs gur pnzc gb zrrg jvgu
Tbq; naq gurl fgbbq ng gur argure cneg bs gur zbhag.

19:18 Naq zbhag Fvanv jnf nygbtrgure ba n fzbxr, orpnhfr gur YBEQ
qrfpraqrq hcba vg va sver: naq gur fzbxr gurerbs nfpraqrq nf gur fzbxr
bs n sheanpr, naq gur jubyr zbhag dhnxrq terngyl.

19:19 Naq jura gur ibvpr bs gur gehzcrg fbhaqrq ybat, naq jnkrq ybhqre
naq ybhqre, Zbfrf fcnxr, naq Tbq nafjrerq uvz ol n ibvpr.

19:20 Naq gur YBEQ pnzr qbja hcba zbhag Fvanv, ba gur gbc bs gur
zbhag: naq gur YBEQ pnyyrq Zbfrf hc gb gur gbc bs gur zbhag; naq Zbfrf
jrag hc.

19:21 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Tb qbja, punetr gur crbcyr, yrfg
gurl oernx guebhtu hagb gur YBEQ gb tnmr, naq znal bs gurz crevfu.

19:22 Naq yrg gur cevrfgf nyfb, juvpu pbzr arne gb gur YBEQ, fnapgvsl
gurzfryirf, yrfg gur YBEQ oernx sbegu hcba gurz.

19:23 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb gur YBEQ, Gur crbcyr pnaabg pbzr hc gb zbhag
Fvanv: sbe gubh punetrqfg hf, fnlvat, Frg obhaqf nobhg gur zbhag, naq
fnapgvsl vg.

19:24 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb uvz, Njnl, trg gurr qbja, naq gubh funyg
pbzr hc, gubh, naq Nneba jvgu gurr: ohg yrg abg gur cevrfgf naq gur
crbcyr oernx guebhtu gb pbzr hc hagb gur YBEQ, yrfg ur oernx sbegu
hcba gurz.

19:25 Fb Zbfrf jrag qbja hagb gur crbcyr, naq fcnxr hagb gurz.

20:1 Naq Tbq fcnxr nyy gurfr jbeqf, fnlvat, 20:2 V nz gur YBEQ gul
Tbq, juvpu unir oebhtug gurr bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, bhg bs gur
ubhfr bs obaqntr.

20:3 Gubh funyg unir ab bgure tbqf orsber zr.

20:4 Gubh funyg abg znxr hagb gurr nal tenira vzntr, be nal yvxrarff
bs nal guvat gung vf va urnira nobir, be gung vf va gur rnegu orarngu,
be gung vf va gur jngre haqre gur rnegu.

20:5 Gubh funyg abg obj qbja gulfrys gb gurz, abe freir gurz: sbe V
gur YBEQ gul Tbq nz n wrnybhf Tbq, ivfvgvat gur vavdhvgl bs gur
snguref hcba gur puvyqera hagb gur guveq naq sbhegu trarengvba bs gurz
gung ungr zr; 20:6 Naq furjvat zrepl hagb gubhfnaqf bs gurz gung ybir
zr, naq xrrc zl pbzznaqzragf.

20:7 Gubh funyg abg gnxr gur anzr bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq va inva; sbe gur
YBEQ jvyy abg ubyq uvz thvygyrff gung gnxrgu uvf anzr va inva.

20:8 Erzrzore gur fnoongu qnl, gb xrrc vg ubyl.

20:9 Fvk qnlf funyg gubh ynobhe, naq qb nyy gul jbex: 20:10 Ohg gur
friragu qnl vf gur fnoongu bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq: va vg gubh funyg abg
qb nal jbex, gubh, abe gul fba, abe gul qnhtugre, gul znafreinag, abe
gul znvqfreinag, abe gul pnggyr, abe gul fgenatre gung vf jvguva gul
tngrf: 20:11 Sbe va fvk qnlf gur YBEQ znqr urnira naq rnegu, gur frn,
naq nyy gung va gurz vf, naq erfgrq gur friragu qnl: jurersber gur
YBEQ oyrffrq gur fnoongu qnl, naq unyybjrq vg.

20:12 Ubabhe gul sngure naq gul zbgure: gung gul qnlf znl or ybat hcba
gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu gurr.

20:13 Gubh funyg abg xvyy.

20:14 Gubh funyg abg pbzzvg nqhygrel.

20:15 Gubh funyg abg fgrny.

20:16 Gubh funyg abg orne snyfr jvgarff ntnvafg gul arvtuobhe.

20:17 Gubh funyg abg pbirg gul arvtuobhe'f ubhfr, gubh funyg abg pbirg
gul arvtuobhe'f jvsr, abe uvf znafreinag, abe uvf znvqfreinag, abe uvf
bk, abe uvf nff, abe nal guvat gung vf gul arvtuobhe'f.

20:18 Naq nyy gur crbcyr fnj gur guhaqrevatf, naq gur yvtugavatf, naq
gur abvfr bs gur gehzcrg, naq gur zbhagnva fzbxvat: naq jura gur
crbcyr fnj vg, gurl erzbirq, naq fgbbq nsne bss.

20:19 Naq gurl fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Fcrnx gubh jvgu hf, naq jr jvyy urne:
ohg yrg abg Tbq fcrnx jvgu hf, yrfg jr qvr.

20:20 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb gur crbcyr, Srne abg: sbe Tbq vf pbzr gb
cebir lbh, naq gung uvf srne znl or orsber lbhe snprf, gung lr fva
abg.

20:21 Naq gur crbcyr fgbbq nsne bss, naq Zbfrf qerj arne hagb gur
guvpx qnexarff jurer Tbq jnf.

20:22 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Guhf gubh funyg fnl hagb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, Lr unir frra gung V unir gnyxrq jvgu lbh sebz
urnira.

20:23 Lr funyy abg znxr jvgu zr tbqf bs fvyire, arvgure funyy lr znxr
hagb lbh tbqf bs tbyq.

20:24 Na nygne bs rnegu gubh funyg znxr hagb zr, naq funyg fnpevsvpr
gurerba gul oheag bssrevatf, naq gul crnpr bssrevatf, gul furrc, naq
guvar bkra: va nyy cynprf jurer V erpbeq zl anzr V jvyy pbzr hagb
gurr, naq V jvyy oyrff gurr.

20:25 Naq vs gubh jvyg znxr zr na nygne bs fgbar, gubh funyg abg ohvyq
vg bs urja fgbar: sbe vs gubh yvsg hc gul gbby hcba vg, gubh unfg
cbyyhgrq vg.

20:26 Arvgure funyg gubh tb hc ol fgrcf hagb zvar nygne, gung gul
anxrqarff or abg qvfpbirerq gurerba.

21:1 Abj gurfr ner gur whqtzragf juvpu gubh funyg frg orsber gurz.

21:2 Vs gubh ohl na Uroerj freinag, fvk lrnef ur funyy freir: naq va
gur friragu ur funyy tb bhg serr sbe abguvat.

21:3 Vs ur pnzr va ol uvzfrys, ur funyy tb bhg ol uvzfrys: vs ur jrer
zneevrq, gura uvf jvsr funyy tb bhg jvgu uvz.

21:4 Vs uvf znfgre unir tvira uvz n jvsr, naq fur unir obea uvz fbaf
be qnhtugref; gur jvsr naq ure puvyqera funyy or ure znfgre'f, naq ur
funyy tb bhg ol uvzfrys.

21:5 Naq vs gur freinag funyy cynvayl fnl, V ybir zl znfgre, zl jvsr,
naq zl puvyqera; V jvyy abg tb bhg serr: 21:6 Gura uvf znfgre funyy
oevat uvz hagb gur whqtrf; ur funyy nyfb oevat uvz gb gur qbbe, be
hagb gur qbbe cbfg; naq uvf znfgre funyy ober uvf rne guebhtu jvgu na
nhy; naq ur funyy freir uvz sbe rire.

21:7 Naq vs n zna fryy uvf qnhtugre gb or n znvqfreinag, fur funyy abg
tb bhg nf gur zrafreinagf qb.

21:8 Vs fur cyrnfr abg ure znfgre, jub ungu orgebgurq ure gb uvzfrys,
gura funyy ur yrg ure or erqrrzrq: gb fryy ure hagb n fgenatr angvba
ur funyy unir ab cbjre, frrvat ur ungu qrnyg qrprvgshyyl jvgu ure.

21:9 Naq vs ur unir orgebgurq ure hagb uvf fba, ur funyy qrny jvgu ure
nsgre gur znaare bs qnhtugref.

21:10 Vs ur gnxr uvz nabgure jvsr; ure sbbq, ure envzrag, naq ure qhgl
bs zneevntr, funyy ur abg qvzvavfu.

21:11 Naq vs ur qb abg gurfr guerr hagb ure, gura funyy fur tb bhg
serr jvgubhg zbarl.

21:12 Ur gung fzvgrgu n zna, fb gung ur qvr, funyy or fheryl chg gb
qrngu.

21:13 Naq vs n zna yvr abg va jnvg, ohg Tbq qryvire uvz vagb uvf unaq;
gura V jvyy nccbvag gurr n cynpr juvgure ur funyy syrr.

21:14 Ohg vs n zna pbzr cerfhzcghbhfyl hcba uvf arvtuobhe, gb fynl uvz
jvgu thvyr; gubh funyg gnxr uvz sebz zvar nygne, gung ur znl qvr.

21:15 Naq ur gung fzvgrgu uvf sngure, be uvf zbgure, funyy or fheryl
chg gb qrngu.

21:16 Naq ur gung fgrnyrgu n zna, naq fryyrgu uvz, be vs ur or sbhaq
va uvf unaq, ur funyy fheryl or chg gb qrngu.

21:17 Naq ur gung phefrgu uvf sngure, be uvf zbgure, funyy fheryl or
chg gb qrngu.

21:18 Naq vs zra fgevir gbtrgure, naq bar fzvgr nabgure jvgu n fgbar,
be jvgu uvf svfg, naq ur qvr abg, ohg xrrcrgu uvf orq: 21:19 Vs ur
evfr ntnva, naq jnyx noebnq hcba uvf fgnss, gura funyy ur gung fzbgr
uvz or dhvg: bayl ur funyy cnl sbe gur ybff bs uvf gvzr, naq funyy
pnhfr uvz gb or gubebhtuyl urnyrq.

21:20 Naq vs n zna fzvgr uvf freinag, be uvf znvq, jvgu n ebq, naq ur
qvr haqre uvf unaq; ur funyy or fheryl chavfurq.

21:21 Abgjvgufgnaqvat, vs ur pbagvahr n qnl be gjb, ur funyy abg or
chavfurq: sbe ur vf uvf zbarl.

21:22 Vs zra fgevir, naq uheg n jbzna jvgu puvyq, fb gung ure sehvg
qrcneg sebz ure, naq lrg ab zvfpuvrs sbyybj: ur funyy or fheryl
chavfurq, nppbeqvat nf gur jbzna'f uhfonaq jvyy ynl hcba uvz; naq ur
funyy cnl nf gur whqtrf qrgrezvar.

21:23 Naq vs nal zvfpuvrs sbyybj, gura gubh funyg tvir yvsr sbe yvsr,
21:24 Rlr sbe rlr, gbbgu sbe gbbgu, unaq sbe unaq, sbbg sbe sbbg,
21:25 Oheavat sbe oheavat, jbhaq sbe jbhaq, fgevcr sbe fgevcr.

21:26 Naq vs n zna fzvgr gur rlr bs uvf freinag, be gur rlr bs uvf
znvq, gung vg crevfu; ur funyy yrg uvz tb serr sbe uvf rlr'f fnxr.

21:27 Naq vs ur fzvgr bhg uvf znafreinag'f gbbgu, be uvf znvqfreinag'f
gbbgu; ur funyy yrg uvz tb serr sbe uvf gbbgu'f fnxr.

21:28 Vs na bk tber n zna be n jbzna, gung gurl qvr: gura gur bk funyy
or fheryl fgbarq, naq uvf syrfu funyy abg or rngra; ohg gur bjare bs
gur bk funyy or dhvg.

21:29 Ohg vs gur bk jrer jbag gb chfu jvgu uvf ubea va gvzr cnfg, naq
vg ungu orra grfgvsvrq gb uvf bjare, naq ur ungu abg xrcg uvz va, ohg
gung ur ungu xvyyrq n zna be n jbzna; gur bk funyy or fgbarq, naq uvf
bjare nyfb funyy or chg gb qrngu.

21:30 Vs gurer or ynvq ba uvz n fhz bs zbarl, gura ur funyy tvir sbe
gur enafbz bs uvf yvsr jungfbrire vf ynvq hcba uvz.

21:31 Jurgure ur unir tberq n fba, be unir tberq n qnhtugre, nppbeqvat
gb guvf whqtzrag funyy vg or qbar hagb uvz.

21:32 Vs gur bk funyy chfu n znafreinag be n znvqfreinag; ur funyy
tvir hagb gurve znfgre guvegl furxryf bs fvyire, naq gur bk funyy or
fgbarq.

21:33 Naq vs n zna funyy bcra n cvg, be vs n zna funyy qvt n cvg, naq
abg pbire vg, naq na bk be na nff snyy gurerva; 21:34 Gur bjare bs gur
cvg funyy znxr vg tbbq, naq tvir zbarl hagb gur bjare bs gurz; naq gur
qrnq ornfg funyy or uvf.

21:35 Naq vs bar zna'f bk uheg nabgure'f, gung ur qvr; gura gurl funyy
fryy gur yvir bk, naq qvivqr gur zbarl bs vg; naq gur qrnq bk nyfb
gurl funyy qvivqr.

21:36 Be vs vg or xabja gung gur bk ungu hfrq gb chfu va gvzr cnfg,
naq uvf bjare ungu abg xrcg uvz va; ur funyy fheryl cnl bk sbe bk; naq
gur qrnq funyy or uvf bja.

22:1 Vs n zna funyy fgrny na bk, be n furrc, naq xvyy vg, be fryy vg;
ur funyy erfgber svir bkra sbe na bk, naq sbhe furrc sbe n furrc.

22:2 Vs n guvrs or sbhaq oernxvat hc, naq or fzvggra gung ur qvr,
gurer funyy ab oybbq or furq sbe uvz.

22:3 Vs gur fha or evfra hcba uvz, gurer funyy or oybbq furq sbe uvz;
sbe ur fubhyq znxr shyy erfgvghgvba; vs ur unir abguvat, gura ur funyy
or fbyq sbe uvf gursg.

22:4 Vs gur gursg or pregnvayl sbhaq va uvf unaq nyvir, jurgure vg or
bk, be nff, be furrc; ur funyy erfgber qbhoyr.

22:5 Vs n zna funyy pnhfr n svryq be ivarlneq gb or rngra, naq funyy
chg va uvf ornfg, naq funyy srrq va nabgure zna'f svryq; bs gur orfg
bs uvf bja svryq, naq bs gur orfg bs uvf bja ivarlneq, funyy ur znxr
erfgvghgvba.

22:6 Vs sver oernx bhg, naq pngpu va gubeaf, fb gung gur fgnpxf bs
pbea, be gur fgnaqvat pbea, be gur svryq, or pbafhzrq gurerjvgu; ur
gung xvaqyrq gur sver funyy fheryl znxr erfgvghgvba.

22:7 Vs n zna funyy qryvire hagb uvf arvtuobhe zbarl be fghss gb xrrc,
naq vg or fgbyra bhg bs gur zna'f ubhfr; vs gur guvrs or sbhaq, yrg
uvz cnl qbhoyr.

22:8 Vs gur guvrs or abg sbhaq, gura gur znfgre bs gur ubhfr funyy or
oebhtug hagb gur whqtrf, gb frr jurgure ur unir chg uvf unaq hagb uvf
arvtuobhe'f tbbqf.

22:9 Sbe nyy znaare bs gerfcnff, jurgure vg or sbe bk, sbe nff, sbe
furrc, sbe envzrag, be sbe nal znaare bs ybfg guvat juvpu nabgure
punyyratrgu gb or uvf, gur pnhfr bs obgu cnegvrf funyy pbzr orsber gur
whqtrf; naq jubz gur whqtrf funyy pbaqrza, ur funyy cnl qbhoyr hagb
uvf arvtuobhe.

22:10 Vs n zna qryvire hagb uvf arvtuobhe na nff, be na bk, be n
furrc, be nal ornfg, gb xrrc; naq vg qvr, be or uheg, be qevira njnl,
ab zna frrvat vg: 22:11 Gura funyy na bngu bs gur YBEQ or orgjrra gurz
obgu, gung ur ungu abg chg uvf unaq hagb uvf arvtuobhe'f tbbqf; naq
gur bjare bs vg funyy npprcg gurerbs, naq ur funyy abg znxr vg tbbq.

22:12 Naq vs vg or fgbyra sebz uvz, ur funyy znxr erfgvghgvba hagb gur
bjare gurerbs.

22:13 Vs vg or gbea va cvrprf, gura yrg uvz oevat vg sbe jvgarff, naq
ur funyy abg znxr tbbq gung juvpu jnf gbea.

22:14 Naq vs n zna obeebj bhtug bs uvf arvtuobhe, naq vg or uheg, be
qvr, gur bjare gurerbs orvat abg jvgu vg, ur funyy fheryl znxr vg
tbbq.

22:15 Ohg vs gur bjare gurerbs or jvgu vg, ur funyy abg znxr vg tbbq:
vs vg or na uverq guvat, vg pnzr sbe uvf uver.

22:16 Naq vs n zna ragvpr n znvq gung vf abg orgebgurq, naq yvr jvgu
ure, ur funyy fheryl raqbj ure gb or uvf jvsr.

22:17 Vs ure sngure hggreyl ershfr gb tvir ure hagb uvz, ur funyy cnl
zbarl nppbeqvat gb gur qbjel bs ivetvaf.

22:18 Gubh funyg abg fhssre n jvgpu gb yvir.

22:19 Jubfbrire yvrgu jvgu n ornfg funyy fheryl or chg gb qrngu.

22:20 Ur gung fnpevsvprgu hagb nal tbq, fnir hagb gur YBEQ bayl, ur
funyy or hggreyl qrfgeblrq.

22:21 Gubh funyg arvgure irk n fgenatre, abe bccerff uvz: sbe lr jrer
fgenatref va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

22:22 Lr funyy abg nssyvpg nal jvqbj, be sngureyrff puvyq.

22:23 Vs gubh nssyvpg gurz va nal jvfr, naq gurl pel ng nyy hagb zr, V
jvyy fheryl urne gurve pel; 22:24 Naq zl jengu funyy jnk ubg, naq V
jvyy xvyy lbh jvgu gur fjbeq; naq lbhe jvirf funyy or jvqbjf, naq lbhe
puvyqera sngureyrff.

22:25 Vs gubh yraq zbarl gb nal bs zl crbcyr gung vf cbbe ol gurr,
gubh funyg abg or gb uvz nf na hfhere, arvgure funyg gubh ynl hcba uvz
hfhel.

22:26 Vs gubh ng nyy gnxr gul arvtuobhe'f envzrag gb cyrqtr, gubh
funyg qryvire vg hagb uvz ol gung gur fha tbrgu qbja: 22:27 Sbe gung
vf uvf pbirevat bayl, vg vf uvf envzrag sbe uvf fxva: jurerva funyy ur
fyrrc? naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, jura ur pevrgu hagb zr, gung V jvyy
urne; sbe V nz tenpvbhf.

22:28 Gubh funyg abg erivyr gur tbqf, abe phefr gur ehyre bs gul
crbcyr.

22:29 Gubh funyg abg qrynl gb bssre gur svefg bs gul evcr sehvgf, naq
bs gul yvdhbef: gur svefgobea bs gul fbaf funyg gubh tvir hagb zr.

22:30 Yvxrjvfr funyg gubh qb jvgu guvar bkra, naq jvgu gul furrc:
frira qnlf vg funyy or jvgu uvf qnz; ba gur rvtugu qnl gubh funyg tvir
vg zr.

22:31 Naq lr funyy or ubyl zra hagb zr: arvgure funyy lr rng nal syrfu
gung vf gbea bs ornfgf va gur svryq; lr funyy pnfg vg gb gur qbtf.

23:1 Gubh funyg abg envfr n snyfr ercbeg: chg abg guvar unaq jvgu gur
jvpxrq gb or na haevtugrbhf jvgarff.

23:2 Gubh funyg abg sbyybj n zhygvghqr gb qb rivy; arvgure funyg gubh
fcrnx va n pnhfr gb qrpyvar nsgre znal gb jerfg whqtzrag: 23:3 Arvgure
funyg gubh pbhagranapr n cbbe zna va uvf pnhfr.

23:4 Vs gubh zrrg guvar rarzl'f bk be uvf nff tbvat nfgenl, gubh funyg
fheryl oevat vg onpx gb uvz ntnva.

23:5 Vs gubh frr gur nff bs uvz gung ungrgu gurr ylvat haqre uvf
oheqra, naq jbhyqrfg sbeorne gb uryc uvz, gubh funyg fheryl uryc jvgu
uvz.

23:6 Gubh funyg abg jerfg gur whqtzrag bs gul cbbe va uvf pnhfr.

23:7 Xrrc gurr sne sebz n snyfr znggre; naq gur vaabprag naq evtugrbhf
fynl gubh abg: sbe V jvyy abg whfgvsl gur jvpxrq.

23:8 Naq gubh funyg gnxr ab tvsg: sbe gur tvsg oyvaqrgu gur jvfr, naq
creiregrgu gur jbeqf bs gur evtugrbhf.

23:9 Nyfb gubh funyg abg bccerff n fgenatre: sbe lr xabj gur urneg bs
n fgenatre, frrvat lr jrer fgenatref va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

23:10 Naq fvk lrnef gubh funyg fbj gul ynaq, naq funyg tngure va gur
sehvgf gurerbs: 23:11 Ohg gur friragu lrne gubh funyg yrg vg erfg naq
yvr fgvyy; gung gur cbbe bs gul crbcyr znl rng: naq jung gurl yrnir
gur ornfgf bs gur svryq funyy rng. Va yvxr znaare gubh funyg qrny jvgu
gul ivarlneq, naq jvgu gul byvirlneq.

23:12 Fvk qnlf gubh funyg qb gul jbex, naq ba gur friragu qnl gubh
funyg erfg: gung guvar bk naq guvar nff znl erfg, naq gur fba bs gul
unaqznvq, naq gur fgenatre, znl or erserfurq.

23:13 Naq va nyy guvatf gung V unir fnvq hagb lbh or pvephzfcrpg: naq
znxr ab zragvba bs gur anzr bs bgure tbqf, arvgure yrg vg or urneq bhg
bs gul zbhgu.

23:14 Guerr gvzrf gubh funyg xrrc n srnfg hagb zr va gur lrne.

23:15 Gubh funyg xrrc gur srnfg bs hayrnirarq oernq: (gubh funyg rng
hayrnirarq oernq frira qnlf, nf V pbzznaqrq gurr, va gur gvzr
nccbvagrq bs gur zbagu Novo; sbe va vg gubh pnzrfg bhg sebz Rtlcg: naq
abar funyy nccrne orsber zr rzcgl:) 23:16 Naq gur srnfg bs uneirfg,
gur svefgsehvgf bs gul ynobhef, juvpu gubh unfg fbja va gur svryq: naq
gur srnfg bs vatngurevat, juvpu vf va gur raq bs gur lrne, jura gubh
unfg tngurerq va gul ynobhef bhg bs gur svryq.

23:17 Guerr vgrzf va gur lrne nyy gul znyrf funyy nccrne orsber gur
YBEQ Tbq.

23:18 Gubh funyg abg bssre gur oybbq bs zl fnpevsvpr jvgu yrnirarq
oernq; arvgure funyy gur sng bs zl fnpevsvpr erznva hagvy gur zbeavat.

23:19 Gur svefg bs gur svefgsehvgf bs gul ynaq gubh funyg oevat vagb
gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq. Gubh funyg abg frrgur n xvq va uvf
zbgure'f zvyx.

23:20 Orubyq, V fraq na Natry orsber gurr, gb xrrc gurr va gur jnl,
naq gb oevat gurr vagb gur cynpr juvpu V unir cercnerq.

23:21 Orjner bs uvz, naq borl uvf ibvpr, cebibxr uvz abg; sbe ur jvyy
abg cneqba lbhe genafterffvbaf: sbe zl anzr vf va uvz.

23:22 Ohg vs gubh funyg vaqrrq borl uvf ibvpr, naq qb nyy gung V
fcrnx; gura V jvyy or na rarzl hagb guvar rarzvrf, naq na nqirefnel
hagb guvar nqirefnevrf.

23:23 Sbe zvar Natry funyy tb orsber gurr, naq oevat gurr va hagb gur
Nzbevgrf, naq gur Uvggvgrf, naq gur Crevmmvgrf, naq gur Pnannavgrf,
gur Uvivgrf, naq gur Wrohfvgrf: naq V jvyy phg gurz bss.

23:24 Gubh funyg abg obj qbja gb gurve tbqf, abe freir gurz, abe qb
nsgre gurve jbexf: ohg gubh funyg hggreyl bireguebj gurz, naq dhvgr
oernx qbja gurve vzntrf.

23:25 Naq lr funyy freir gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, naq ur funyy oyrff gul
oernq, naq gul jngre; naq V jvyy gnxr fvpxarff njnl sebz gur zvqfg bs
gurr.

23:26 Gurer funyy abguvat pnfg gurve lbhat, abe or oneera, va gul
ynaq: gur ahzore bs gul qnlf V jvyy shysvy.

23:27 V jvyy fraq zl srne orsber gurr, naq jvyy qrfgebl nyy gur crbcyr
gb jubz gubh funyg pbzr, naq V jvyy znxr nyy guvar rarzvrf ghea gurve
onpxf hagb gurr.

23:28 Naq V jvyy fraq ubeargf orsber gurr, juvpu funyy qevir bhg gur
Uvivgr, gur Pnannavgr, naq gur Uvggvgr, sebz orsber gurr.

23:29 V jvyy abg qevir gurz bhg sebz orsber gurr va bar lrne; yrfg gur
ynaq orpbzr qrfbyngr, naq gur ornfg bs gur svryq zhygvcyl ntnvafg
gurr.

23:30 Ol yvggyr naq yvggyr V jvyy qevir gurz bhg sebz orsber gurr,
hagvy gubh or vapernfrq, naq vaurevg gur ynaq.

23:31 Naq V jvyy frg gul obhaqf sebz gur Erq frn rira hagb gur frn bs
gur Cuvyvfgvarf, naq sebz gur qrfreg hagb gur evire: sbe V jvyy
qryvire gur vaunovgnagf bs gur ynaq vagb lbhe unaq; naq gubh funyg
qevir gurz bhg orsber gurr.

23:32 Gubh funyg znxr ab pbiranag jvgu gurz, abe jvgu gurve tbqf.

23:33 Gurl funyy abg qjryy va gul ynaq, yrfg gurl znxr gurr fva
ntnvafg zr: sbe vs gubh freir gurve tbqf, vg jvyy fheryl or n faner
hagb gurr.

24:1 Naq ur fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Pbzr hc hagb gur YBEQ, gubh, naq Nneba,
Anqno, naq Novuh, naq friragl bs gur ryqref bs Vfenry; naq jbefuvc lr
nsne bss.

24:2 Naq Zbfrf nybar funyy pbzr arne gur YBEQ: ohg gurl funyy abg pbzr
avtu; arvgure funyy gur crbcyr tb hc jvgu uvz.

24:3 Naq Zbfrf pnzr naq gbyq gur crbcyr nyy gur jbeqf bs gur YBEQ, naq
nyy gur whqtzragf: naq nyy gur crbcyr nafjrerq jvgu bar ibvpr, naq
fnvq, Nyy gur jbeqf juvpu gur YBEQ ungu fnvq jvyy jr qb.

24:4 Naq Zbfrf jebgr nyy gur jbeqf bs gur YBEQ, naq ebfr hc rneyl va
gur zbeavat, naq ohvyqrq na nygne haqre gur uvyy, naq gjryir cvyynef,
nppbeqvat gb gur gjryir gevorf bs Vfenry.

24:5 Naq ur frag lbhat zra bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, juvpu bssrerq
oheag bssrevatf, naq fnpevsvprq crnpr bssrevatf bs bkra hagb gur YBEQ.

24:6 Naq Zbfrf gbbx unys bs gur oybbq, naq chg vg va onfbaf; naq unys
bs gur oybbq ur fcevaxyrq ba gur nygne.

24:7 Naq ur gbbx gur obbx bs gur pbiranag, naq ernq va gur nhqvrapr bs
gur crbcyr: naq gurl fnvq, Nyy gung gur YBEQ ungu fnvq jvyy jr qb, naq
or borqvrag.

24:8 Naq Zbfrf gbbx gur oybbq, naq fcevaxyrq vg ba gur crbcyr, naq
fnvq, Orubyq gur oybbq bs gur pbiranag, juvpu gur YBEQ ungu znqr jvgu
lbh pbapreavat nyy gurfr jbeqf.

24:9 Gura jrag hc Zbfrf, naq Nneba, Anqno, naq Novuh, naq friragl bs
gur ryqref bs Vfenry: 24:10 Naq gurl fnj gur Tbq bs Vfenry: naq gurer
jnf haqre uvf srrg nf vg jrer n cnirq jbex bs n fnccuver fgbar, naq nf
vg jrer gur obql bs urnira va uvf pyrnearff.

24:11 Naq hcba gur aboyrf bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry ur ynvq abg uvf
unaq: nyfb gurl fnj Tbq, naq qvq rng naq qevax.

24:12 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Pbzr hc gb zr vagb gur zbhag, naq
or gurer: naq V jvyy tvir gurr gnoyrf bs fgbar, naq n ynj, naq
pbzznaqzragf juvpu V unir jevggra; gung gubh znlrfg grnpu gurz.

24:13 Naq Zbfrf ebfr hc, naq uvf zvavfgre Wbfuhn: naq Zbfrf jrag hc
vagb gur zbhag bs Tbq.

24:14 Naq ur fnvq hagb gur ryqref, Gneel lr urer sbe hf, hagvy jr pbzr
ntnva hagb lbh: naq, orubyq, Nneba naq Uhe ner jvgu lbh: vs nal zna
unir nal znggref gb qb, yrg uvz pbzr hagb gurz.

24:15 Naq Zbfrf jrag hc vagb gur zbhag, naq n pybhq pbirerq gur zbhag.

24:16 Naq gur tybel bs gur YBEQ nobqr hcba zbhag Fvanv, naq gur pybhq
pbirerq vg fvk qnlf: naq gur friragu qnl ur pnyyrq hagb Zbfrf bhg bs
gur zvqfg bs gur pybhq.

24:17 Naq gur fvtug bs gur tybel bs gur YBEQ jnf yvxr qribhevat sver
ba gur gbc bs gur zbhag va gur rlrf bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

24:18 Naq Zbfrf jrag vagb gur zvqfg bs gur pybhq, naq tng uvz hc vagb
gur zbhag: naq Zbfrf jnf va gur zbhag sbegl qnlf naq sbegl avtugf.

25:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 25:2 Fcrnx hagb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, gung gurl oevat zr na bssrevat: bs rirel zna gung
tvirgu vg jvyyvatyl jvgu uvf urneg lr funyy gnxr zl bssrevat.

25:3 Naq guvf vf gur bssrevat juvpu lr funyy gnxr bs gurz; tbyq, naq
fvyire, naq oenff, 25:4 Naq oyhr, naq checyr, naq fpneyrg, naq svar
yvara, naq tbngf' unve, 25:5 Naq enzf' fxvaf qlrq erq, naq onqtref'
fxvaf, naq fuvggvz jbbq, 25:6 Bvy sbe gur yvtug, fcvprf sbe nabvagvat
bvy, naq sbe fjrrg vaprafr, 25:7 Balk fgbarf, naq fgbarf gb or frg va
gur rcubq, naq va gur oernfgcyngr.

25:8 Naq yrg gurz znxr zr n fnapghnel; gung V znl qjryy nzbat gurz.

25:9 Nppbeqvat gb nyy gung V furj gurr, nsgre gur cnggrea bs gur
gnoreanpyr, naq gur cnggrea bs nyy gur vafgehzragf gurerbs, rira fb
funyy lr znxr vg.

25:10 Naq gurl funyy znxr na nex bs fuvggvz jbbq: gjb phovgf naq n
unys funyy or gur yratgu gurerbs, naq n phovg naq n unys gur oernqgu
gurerbs, naq n phovg naq n unys gur urvtug gurerbs.

25:11 Naq gubh funyg bireynl vg jvgu cher tbyq, jvguva naq jvgubhg
funyg gubh bireynl vg, naq funyg znxr hcba vg n pebja bs tbyq ebhaq
nobhg.

25:12 Naq gubh funyg pnfg sbhe evatf bs tbyq sbe vg, naq chg gurz va
gur sbhe pbearef gurerbs; naq gjb evatf funyy or va gur bar fvqr bs
vg, naq gjb evatf va gur bgure fvqr bs vg.

25:13 Naq gubh funyg znxr fgnirf bs fuvggvz jbbq, naq bireynl gurz
jvgu tbyq.

25:14 Naq gubh funyg chg gur fgnirf vagb gur evatf ol gur fvqrf bs gur
nex, gung gur nex znl or obear jvgu gurz.

25:15 Gur fgnirf funyy or va gur evatf bs gur nex: gurl funyy abg or
gnxra sebz vg.

25:16 Naq gubh funyg chg vagb gur nex gur grfgvzbal juvpu V funyy tvir
gurr.

25:17 Naq gubh funyg znxr n zrepl frng bs cher tbyq: gjb phovgf naq n
unys funyy or gur yratgu gurerbs, naq n phovg naq n unys gur oernqgu
gurerbs.

25:18 Naq gubh funyg znxr gjb purehovzf bs tbyq, bs orngra jbex funyg
gubh znxr gurz, va gur gjb raqf bs gur zrepl frng.

25:19 Naq znxr bar pureho ba gur bar raq, naq gur bgure pureho ba gur
bgure raq: rira bs gur zrepl frng funyy lr znxr gur purehovzf ba gur
gjb raqf gurerbs.

25:20 Naq gur purehovzf funyy fgergpu sbegu gurve jvatf ba uvtu,
pbirevat gur zrepl frng jvgu gurve jvatf, naq gurve snprf funyy ybbx
bar gb nabgure; gbjneq gur zrepl frng funyy gur snprf bs gur purehovzf
or.

25:21 Naq gubh funyg chg gur zrepl frng nobir hcba gur nex; naq va gur
nex gubh funyg chg gur grfgvzbal gung V funyy tvir gurr.

25:22 Naq gurer V jvyy zrrg jvgu gurr, naq V jvyy pbzzhar jvgu gurr
sebz nobir gur zrepl frng, sebz orgjrra gur gjb purehovzf juvpu ner
hcba gur nex bs gur grfgvzbal, bs nyy guvatf juvpu V jvyy tvir gurr va
pbzznaqzrag hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

25:23 Gubh funyg nyfb znxr n gnoyr bs fuvggvz jbbq: gjb phovgf funyy
or gur yratgu gurerbs, naq n phovg gur oernqgu gurerbs, naq n phovg
naq n unys gur urvtug gurerbs.

25:24 Naq gubh funyg bireynl vg jvgu cher tbyq, naq znxr gurergb n
pebja bs tbyq ebhaq nobhg.

25:25 Naq gubh funyg znxr hagb vg n obeqre bs na unaq oernqgu ebhaq
nobhg, naq gubh funyg znxr n tbyqra pebja gb gur obeqre gurerbs ebhaq
nobhg.

25:26 Naq gubh funyg znxr sbe vg sbhe evatf bs tbyq, naq chg gur evatf
va gur sbhe pbearef gung ner ba gur sbhe srrg gurerbs.

25:27 Bire ntnvafg gur obeqre funyy gur evatf or sbe cynprf bs gur
fgnirf gb orne gur gnoyr.

25:28 Naq gubh funyg znxr gur fgnirf bs fuvggvz jbbq, naq bireynl gurz
jvgu tbyq, gung gur gnoyr znl or obear jvgu gurz.

25:29 Naq gubh funyg znxr gur qvfurf gurerbs, naq fcbbaf gurerbs, naq
pbiref gurerbs, naq objyf gurerbs, gb pbire jvguny: bs cher tbyq funyg
gubh znxr gurz.

25:30 Naq gubh funyg frg hcba gur gnoyr furjoernq orsber zr nyjnl.

25:31 Naq gubh funyg znxr n pnaqyrfgvpx bs cher tbyq: bs orngra jbex
funyy gur pnaqyrfgvpx or znqr: uvf funsg, naq uvf oenapurf, uvf objyf,
uvf xabcf, naq uvf sybjref, funyy or bs gur fnzr.

25:32 Naq fvk oenapurf funyy pbzr bhg bs gur fvqrf bs vg; guerr
oenapurf bs gur pnaqyrfgvpx bhg bs gur bar fvqr, naq guerr oenapurf bs
gur pnaqyrfgvpx bhg bs gur bgure fvqr: 25:33 Guerr objyf znqr yvxr
hagb nyzbaqf, jvgu n xabc naq n sybjre va bar oenapu; naq guerr objyf
znqr yvxr nyzbaqf va gur bgure oenapu, jvgu n xabc naq n sybjre: fb va
gur fvk oenapurf gung pbzr bhg bs gur pnaqyrfgvpx.

25:34 Naq va gur pnaqyrfgvpxf funyy or sbhe objyf znqr yvxr hagb
nyzbaqf, jvgu gurve xabcf naq gurve sybjref.

25:35 Naq gurer funyy or n xabc haqre gjb oenapurf bs gur fnzr, naq n
xabc haqre gjb oenapurf bs gur fnzr, naq n xabc haqre gjb oenapurf bs
gur fnzr, nppbeqvat gb gur fvk oenapurf gung cebprrq bhg bs gur
pnaqyrfgvpx.

25:36 Gurve xabcf naq gurve oenapurf funyy or bs gur fnzr: nyy vg
funyy or bar orngra jbex bs cher tbyq.

25:37 Naq gubh funyg znxr gur frira ynzcf gurerbs: naq gurl funyy
yvtug gur ynzcf gurerbs, gung gurl znl tvir yvtug bire ntnvafg vg.

25:38 Naq gur gbatf gurerbs, naq gur fahssqvfurf gurerbs, funyy or bs
cher tbyq.

25:39 Bs n gnyrag bs cher tbyq funyy ur znxr vg, jvgu nyy gurfr
irffryf.

25:40 Naq ybbx gung gubh znxr gurz nsgre gurve cnggrea, juvpu jnf
furjrq gurr va gur zbhag.

26:1 Zberbire gubh funyg znxr gur gnoreanpyr jvgu gra phegnvaf bs svar
gjvarq yvara, naq oyhr, naq checyr, naq fpneyrg: jvgu purehovzf bs
phaavat jbex funyg gubh znxr gurz.

26:2 Gur yratgu bs bar phegnva funyy or rvtug naq gjragl phovgf, naq
gur oernqgu bs bar phegnva sbhe phovgf: naq rirel bar bs gur phegnvaf
funyy unir bar zrnfher.

26:3 Gur svir phegnvaf funyy or pbhcyrq gbtrgure bar gb nabgure; naq
bgure svir phegnvaf funyy or pbhcyrq bar gb nabgure.

26:4 Naq gubh funyg znxr ybbcf bs oyhr hcba gur rqtr bs gur bar
phegnva sebz gur fryirqtr va gur pbhcyvat; naq yvxrjvfr funyg gubh
znxr va gur hggrezbfg rqtr bs nabgure phegnva, va gur pbhcyvat bs gur
frpbaq.

26:5 Svsgl ybbcf funyg gubh znxr va gur bar phegnva, naq svsgl ybbcf
funyg gubh znxr va gur rqtr bs gur phegnva gung vf va gur pbhcyvat bs
gur frpbaq; gung gur ybbcf znl gnxr ubyq bar bs nabgure.

26:6 Naq gubh funyg znxr svsgl gnpurf bs tbyq, naq pbhcyr gur phegnvaf
gbtrgure jvgu gur gnpurf: naq vg funyy or bar gnoreanpyr.

26:7 Naq gubh funyg znxr phegnvaf bs tbngf' unve gb or n pbirevat hcba
gur gnoreanpyr: ryrira phegnvaf funyg gubh znxr.

26:8 Gur yratgu bs bar phegnva funyy or guvegl phovgf, naq gur oernqgu
bs bar phegnva sbhe phovgf: naq gur ryrira phegnvaf funyy or nyy bs
bar zrnfher.

26:9 Naq gubh funyg pbhcyr svir phegnvaf ol gurzfryirf, naq fvk
phegnvaf ol gurzfryirf, naq funyg qbhoyr gur fvkgu phegnva va gur
sbersebag bs gur gnoreanpyr.

26:10 Naq gubh funyg znxr svsgl ybbcf ba gur rqtr bs gur bar phegnva
gung vf bhgzbfg va gur pbhcyvat, naq svsgl ybbcf va gur rqtr bs gur
phegnva juvpu pbhcyrgu gur frpbaq.

26:11 Naq gubh funyg znxr svsgl gnpurf bs oenff, naq chg gur gnpurf
vagb gur ybbcf, naq pbhcyr gur grag gbtrgure, gung vg znl or bar.

26:12 Naq gur erzanag gung erznvargu bs gur phegnvaf bs gur grag, gur
unys phegnva gung erznvargu, funyy unat bire gur onpxfvqr bs gur
gnoreanpyr.

26:13 Naq n phovg ba gur bar fvqr, naq n phovg ba gur bgure fvqr bs
gung juvpu erznvargu va gur yratgu bs gur phegnvaf bs gur grag, vg
funyy unat bire gur fvqrf bs gur gnoreanpyr ba guvf fvqr naq ba gung
fvqr, gb pbire vg.

26:14 Naq gubh funyg znxr n pbirevat sbe gur grag bs enzf' fxvaf qlrq
erq, naq n pbirevat nobir bs onqtref' fxvaf.

26:15 Naq gubh funyg znxr obneqf sbe gur gnoreanpyr bs fuvggvz jbbq
fgnaqvat hc.

26:16 Gra phovgf funyy or gur yratgu bs n obneq, naq n phovg naq n
unys funyy or gur oernqgu bs bar obneq.

26:17 Gjb grabaf funyy gurer or va bar obneq, frg va beqre bar ntnvafg
nabgure: guhf funyg gubh znxr sbe nyy gur obneqf bs gur gnoreanpyr.

26:18 Naq gubh funyg znxr gur obneqf sbe gur gnoreanpyr, gjragl obneqf
ba gur fbhgu fvqr fbhgujneq.

26:19 Naq gubh funyg znxr sbegl fbpxrgf bs fvyire haqre gur gjragl
obneqf; gjb fbpxrgf haqre bar obneq sbe uvf gjb grabaf, naq gjb
fbpxrgf haqre nabgure obneq sbe uvf gjb grabaf.

26:20 Naq sbe gur frpbaq fvqr bs gur gnoreanpyr ba gur abegu fvqr
gurer funyy or gjragl obneqf: 26:21 Naq gurve sbegl fbpxrgf bs fvyire;
gjb fbpxrgf haqre bar obneq, naq gjb fbpxrgf haqre nabgure obneq.

26:22 Naq sbe gur fvqrf bs gur gnoreanpyr jrfgjneq gubh funyg znxr fvk
obneqf.

26:23 Naq gjb obneqf funyg gubh znxr sbe gur pbearef bs gur gnoreanpyr
va gur gjb fvqrf.

26:24 Naq gurl funyy or pbhcyrq gbtrgure orarngu, naq gurl funyy or
pbhcyrq gbtrgure nobir gur urnq bs vg hagb bar evat: guhf funyy vg or
sbe gurz obgu; gurl funyy or sbe gur gjb pbearef.

26:25 Naq gurl funyy or rvtug obneqf, naq gurve fbpxrgf bs fvyire,
fvkgrra fbpxrgf; gjb fbpxrgf haqre bar obneq, naq gjb fbpxrgf haqre
nabgure obneq.

26:26 Naq gubh funyg znxr onef bs fuvggvz jbbq; svir sbe gur obneqf bs
gur bar fvqr bs gur gnoreanpyr, 26:27 Naq svir onef sbe gur obneqf bs
gur bgure fvqr bs gur gnoreanpyr, naq svir onef sbe gur obneqf bs gur
fvqr bs gur gnoreanpyr, sbe gur gjb fvqrf jrfgjneq.

26:28 Naq gur zvqqyr one va gur zvqfg bs gur obneqf funyy ernpu sebz
raq gb raq.

26:29 Naq gubh funyg bireynl gur obneqf jvgu tbyq, naq znxr gurve
evatf bs tbyq sbe cynprf sbe gur onef: naq gubh funyg bireynl gur onef
jvgu tbyq.

26:30 Naq gubh funyg erne hc gur gnoreanpyr nppbeqvat gb gur snfuvba
gurerbs juvpu jnf furjrq gurr va gur zbhag.

26:31 Naq gubh funyg znxr n invy bs oyhr, naq checyr, naq fpneyrg, naq
svar gjvarq yvara bs phaavat jbex: jvgu purehovzf funyy vg or znqr:
26:32 Naq gubh funyg unat vg hcba sbhe cvyynef bs fuvggvz jbbq
bireynvq jvgu tbyq: gurve ubbxf funyy or bs tbyq, hcba gur sbhe
fbpxrgf bs fvyire.

26:33 Naq gubh funyg unat hc gur invy haqre gur gnpurf, gung gubh
znlrfg oevat va guvgure jvguva gur invy gur nex bs gur grfgvzbal: naq
gur invy funyy qvivqr hagb lbh orgjrra gur ubyl cynpr naq gur zbfg
ubyl.

26:34 Naq gubh funyg chg gur zrepl frng hcba gur nex bs gur grfgvzbal
va gur zbfg ubyl cynpr.

26:35 Naq gubh funyg frg gur gnoyr jvgubhg gur invy, naq gur
pnaqyrfgvpx bire ntnvafg gur gnoyr ba gur fvqr bs gur gnoreanpyr
gbjneq gur fbhgu: naq gubh funyg chg gur gnoyr ba gur abegu fvqr.

26:36 Naq gubh funyg znxr na unatvat sbe gur qbbe bs gur grag, bs
oyhr, naq checyr, naq fpneyrg, naq svar gjvarq yvara, jebhtug jvgu
arrqyrjbex.

26:37 Naq gubh funyg znxr sbe gur unatvat svir cvyynef bs fuvggvz
jbbq, naq bireynl gurz jvgu tbyq, naq gurve ubbxf funyy or bs tbyq:
naq gubh funyg pnfg svir fbpxrgf bs oenff sbe gurz.

27:1 Naq gubh funyg znxr na nygne bs fuvggvz jbbq, svir phovgf ybat,
naq svir phovgf oebnq; gur nygne funyy or sbhefdhner: naq gur urvtug
gurerbs funyy or guerr phovgf.

27:2 Naq gubh funyg znxr gur ubeaf bs vg hcba gur sbhe pbearef
gurerbs: uvf ubeaf funyy or bs gur fnzr: naq gubh funyg bireynl vg
jvgu oenff.

27:3 Naq gubh funyg znxr uvf cnaf gb erprvir uvf nfurf, naq uvf
fubiryf, naq uvf onfbaf, naq uvf syrfuubbxf, naq uvf svercnaf: nyy gur
irffryf gurerbs gubh funyg znxr bs oenff.

27:4 Naq gubh funyg znxr sbe vg n tengr bs argjbex bs oenff; naq hcba
gur arg funyg gubh znxr sbhe oenfra evatf va gur sbhe pbearef gurerbs.

27:5 Naq gubh funyg chg vg haqre gur pbzcnff bs gur nygne orarngu,
gung gur arg znl or rira gb gur zvqfg bs gur nygne.

27:6 Naq gubh funyg znxr fgnirf sbe gur nygne, fgnirf bs fuvggvz jbbq,
naq bireynl gurz jvgu oenff.

27:7 Naq gur fgnirf funyy or chg vagb gur evatf, naq gur fgnirf funyy
or hcba gur gjb fvqrf bs gur nygne, gb orne vg.

27:8 Ubyybj jvgu obneqf funyg gubh znxr vg: nf vg jnf furjrq gurr va
gur zbhag, fb funyy gurl znxr vg.

27:9 Naq gubh funyg znxr gur pbheg bs gur gnoreanpyr: sbe gur fbhgu
fvqr fbhgujneq gurer funyy or unatvatf sbe gur pbheg bs svar gjvarq
yvara bs na uhaqerq phovgf ybat sbe bar fvqr: 27:10 Naq gur gjragl
cvyynef gurerbs naq gurve gjragl fbpxrgf funyy or bs oenff; gur ubbxf
bs gur cvyynef naq gurve svyyrgf funyy or bs fvyire.

27:11 Naq yvxrjvfr sbe gur abegu fvqr va yratgu gurer funyy or
unatvatf bs na uhaqerq phovgf ybat, naq uvf gjragl cvyynef naq gurve
gjragl fbpxrgf bs oenff; gur ubbxf bs gur cvyynef naq gurve svyyrgf bs
fvyire.

27:12 Naq sbe gur oernqgu bs gur pbheg ba gur jrfg fvqr funyy or
unatvatf bs svsgl phovgf: gurve cvyynef gra, naq gurve fbpxrgf gra.

27:13 Naq gur oernqgu bs gur pbheg ba gur rnfg fvqr rnfgjneq funyy or
svsgl phovgf.

27:14 Gur unatvatf bs bar fvqr bs gur tngr funyy or svsgrra phovgf:
gurve cvyynef guerr, naq gurve fbpxrgf guerr.

27:15 Naq ba gur bgure fvqr funyy or unatvatf svsgrra phovgf: gurve
cvyynef guerr, naq gurve fbpxrgf guerr.

27:16 Naq sbe gur tngr bs gur pbheg funyy or na unatvat bs gjragl
phovgf, bs oyhr, naq checyr, naq fpneyrg, naq svar gjvarq yvara,
jebhtug jvgu arrqyrjbex: naq gurve cvyynef funyy or sbhe, naq gurve
fbpxrgf sbhe.

27:17 Nyy gur cvyynef ebhaq nobhg gur pbheg funyy or svyyrgrq jvgu
fvyire; gurve ubbxf funyy or bs fvyire, naq gurve fbpxrgf bs oenff.

27:18 Gur yratgu bs gur pbheg funyy or na uhaqerq phovgf, naq gur
oernqgu svsgl rirel jurer, naq gur urvtug svir phovgf bs svar gjvarq
yvara, naq gurve fbpxrgf bs oenff.

27:19 Nyy gur irffryf bs gur gnoreanpyr va nyy gur freivpr gurerbs,
naq nyy gur cvaf gurerbs, naq nyy gur cvaf bs gur pbheg, funyy or bs
oenff.

27:20 Naq gubh funyg pbzznaq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, gung gurl oevat
gurr cher bvy byvir orngra sbe gur yvtug, gb pnhfr gur ynzc gb ohea
nyjnlf.

27:21 Va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba jvgubhg gur invy, juvpu vf
orsber gur grfgvzbal, Nneba naq uvf fbaf funyy beqre vg sebz riravat
gb zbeavat orsber gur YBEQ: vg funyy or n fgnghgr sbe rire hagb gurve
trarengvbaf ba gur orunys bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

28:1 Naq gnxr gubh hagb gurr Nneba gul oebgure, naq uvf fbaf jvgu uvz,
sebz nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, gung ur znl zvavfgre hagb zr va gur
cevrfg'f bssvpr, rira Nneba, Anqno naq Novuh, Ryrnmne naq Vgunzne,
Nneba'f fbaf.

28:2 Naq gubh funyg znxr ubyl tnezragf sbe Nneba gul oebgure sbe tybel
naq sbe ornhgl.

28:3 Naq gubh funyg fcrnx hagb nyy gung ner jvfr urnegrq, jubz V unir
svyyrq jvgu gur fcvevg bs jvfqbz, gung gurl znl znxr Nneba'f tnezragf
gb pbafrpengr uvz, gung ur znl zvavfgre hagb zr va gur cevrfg'f
bssvpr.

28:4 Naq gurfr ner gur tnezragf juvpu gurl funyy znxr; n oernfgcyngr,
naq na rcubq, naq n ebor, naq n oebvqrerq pbng, n zvger, naq n tveqyr:
naq gurl funyy znxr ubyl tnezragf sbe Nneba gul oebgure, naq uvf fbaf,
gung ur znl zvavfgre hagb zr va gur cevrfg'f bssvpr.

28:5 Naq gurl funyy gnxr tbyq, naq oyhr, naq checyr, naq fpneyrg, naq
svar yvara.

28:6 Naq gurl funyy znxr gur rcubq bs tbyq, bs oyhr, naq bs checyr, bs
fpneyrg, naq svar gjvarq yvara, jvgu phaavat jbex.

28:7 Vg funyy unir gur gjb fubhyqrecvrprf gurerbs wbvarq ng gur gjb
rqtrf gurerbs; naq fb vg funyy or wbvarq gbtrgure.

28:8 Naq gur phevbhf tveqyr bs gur rcubq, juvpu vf hcba vg, funyy or
bs gur fnzr, nppbeqvat gb gur jbex gurerbs; rira bs tbyq, bs oyhr, naq
checyr, naq fpneyrg, naq svar gjvarq yvara.

28:9 Naq gubh funyg gnxr gjb balk fgbarf, naq tenir ba gurz gur anzrf
bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry: 28:10 Fvk bs gurve anzrf ba bar fgbar, naq
gur bgure fvk anzrf bs gur erfg ba gur bgure fgbar, nppbeqvat gb gurve
ovegu.

28:11 Jvgu gur jbex bs na ratenire va fgbar, yvxr gur ratenivatf bs n
fvtarg, funyg gubh ratenir gur gjb fgbarf jvgu gur anzrf bs gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry: gubh funyg znxr gurz gb or frg va bhpurf bs tbyq.

28:12 Naq gubh funyg chg gur gjb fgbarf hcba gur fubhyqref bs gur
rcubq sbe fgbarf bs zrzbevny hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry: naq Nneba
funyy orne gurve anzrf orsber gur YBEQ hcba uvf gjb fubhyqref sbe n
zrzbevny.

28:13 Naq gubh funyg znxr bhpurf bs tbyq; 28:14 Naq gjb punvaf bs cher
tbyq ng gur raqf; bs jerngura jbex funyg gubh znxr gurz, naq snfgra
gur jerngura punvaf gb gur bhpurf.

28:15 Naq gubh funyg znxr gur oernfgcyngr bs whqtzrag jvgu phaavat
jbex; nsgre gur jbex bs gur rcubq gubh funyg znxr vg; bs tbyq, bs
oyhr, naq bs checyr, naq bs fpneyrg, naq bs svar gjvarq yvara, funyg
gubh znxr vg.

28:16 Sbhefdhner vg funyy or orvat qbhoyrq; n fcna funyy or gur yratgu
gurerbs, naq n fcna funyy or gur oernqgu gurerbs.

28:17 Naq gubh funyg frg va vg frggvatf bs fgbarf, rira sbhe ebjf bs
fgbarf: gur svefg ebj funyy or n fneqvhf, n gbcnm, naq n pneohapyr:
guvf funyy or gur svefg ebj.

28:18 Naq gur frpbaq ebj funyy or na rzrenyq, n fnccuver, naq n
qvnzbaq.

28:19 Naq gur guveq ebj n yvther, na ntngr, naq na nzrgulfg.

28:20 Naq gur sbhegu ebj n orely, naq na balk, naq n wnfcre: gurl
funyy or frg va tbyq va gurve vapybfvatf.

28:21 Naq gur fgbarf funyy or jvgu gur anzrf bs gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, gjryir, nppbeqvat gb gurve anzrf, yvxr gur ratenivatf bs n
fvtarg; rirel bar jvgu uvf anzr funyy gurl or nppbeqvat gb gur gjryir
gevorf.

28:22 Naq gubh funyg znxr hcba gur oernfgcyngr punvaf ng gur raqf bs
jerngura jbex bs cher tbyq.

28:23 Naq gubh funyg znxr hcba gur oernfgcyngr gjb evatf bs tbyq, naq
funyg chg gur gjb evatf ba gur gjb raqf bs gur oernfgcyngr.

28:24 Naq gubh funyg chg gur gjb jerngura punvaf bs tbyq va gur gjb
evatf juvpu ner ba gur raqf bs gur oernfgcyngr.

28:25 Naq gur bgure gjb raqf bs gur gjb jerngura punvaf gubh funyg
snfgra va gur gjb bhpurf, naq chg gurz ba gur fubhyqrecvrprf bs gur
rcubq orsber vg.

28:26 Naq gubh funyg znxr gjb evatf bs tbyq, naq gubh funyg chg gurz
hcba gur gjb raqf bs gur oernfgcyngr va gur obeqre gurerbs, juvpu vf
va gur fvqr bs gur rcubq vajneq.

28:27 Naq gjb bgure evatf bs tbyq gubh funyg znxr, naq funyg chg gurz
ba gur gjb fvqrf bs gur rcubq haqrearngu, gbjneq gur sbercneg gurerbs,
bire ntnvafg gur bgure pbhcyvat gurerbs, nobir gur phevbhf tveqyr bs
gur rcubq.

28:28 Naq gurl funyy ovaq gur oernfgcyngr ol gur evatf gurerbs hagb
gur evatf bs gur rcubq jvgu n ynpr bs oyhr, gung vg znl or nobir gur
phevbhf tveqyr bs gur rcubq, naq gung gur oernfgcyngr or abg ybbfrq
sebz gur rcubq.

28:29 Naq Nneba funyy orne gur anzrf bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry va gur
oernfgcyngr bs whqtzrag hcba uvf urneg, jura ur tbrgu va hagb gur ubyl
cynpr, sbe n zrzbevny orsber gur YBEQ pbagvahnyyl.

28:30 Naq gubh funyg chg va gur oernfgcyngr bs whqtzrag gur Hevz naq
gur Guhzzvz; naq gurl funyy or hcba Nneba'f urneg, jura ur tbrgu va
orsber gur YBEQ: naq Nneba funyy orne gur whqtzrag bs gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry hcba uvf urneg orsber gur YBEQ pbagvahnyyl.

28:31 Naq gubh funyg znxr gur ebor bs gur rcubq nyy bs oyhr.

28:32 Naq gurer funyy or na ubyr va gur gbc bs vg, va gur zvqfg
gurerbs: vg funyy unir n ovaqvat bs jbira jbex ebhaq nobhg gur ubyr bs
vg, nf vg jrer gur ubyr bs na unoretrba, gung vg or abg erag.

28:33 Naq orarngu hcba gur urz bs vg gubh funyg znxr cbzrtenangrf bs
oyhr, naq bs checyr, naq bs fpneyrg, ebhaq nobhg gur urz gurerbs; naq
oryyf bs tbyq orgjrra gurz ebhaq nobhg: 28:34 N tbyqra oryy naq n
cbzrtenangr, n tbyqra oryy naq n cbzrtenangr, hcba gur urz bs gur ebor
ebhaq nobhg.

28:35 Naq vg funyy or hcba Nneba gb zvavfgre: naq uvf fbhaq funyy or
urneq jura ur tbrgu va hagb gur ubyl cynpr orsber gur YBEQ, naq jura
ur pbzrgu bhg, gung ur qvr abg.

28:36 Naq gubh funyg znxr n cyngr bs cher tbyq, naq tenir hcba vg,
yvxr gur ratenivatf bs n fvtarg, UBYVARFF GB GUR YBEQ.

28:37 Naq gubh funyg chg vg ba n oyhr ynpr, gung vg znl or hcba gur
zvger; hcba gur sbersebag bs gur zvger vg funyy or.

28:38 Naq vg funyy or hcba Nneba'f sberurnq, gung Nneba znl orne gur
vavdhvgl bs gur ubyl guvatf, juvpu gur puvyqera bs Vfenry funyy unyybj
va nyy gurve ubyl tvsgf; naq vg funyy or nyjnlf hcba uvf sberurnq,
gung gurl znl or npprcgrq orsber gur YBEQ.

28:39 Naq gubh funyg rzoebvqre gur pbng bs svar yvara, naq gubh funyg
znxr gur zvger bs svar yvara, naq gubh funyg znxr gur tveqyr bs
arrqyrjbex.

28:40 Naq sbe Nneba'f fbaf gubh funyg znxr pbngf, naq gubh funyg znxr
sbe gurz tveqyrf, naq obaargf funyg gubh znxr sbe gurz, sbe tybel naq
sbe ornhgl.

28:41 Naq gubh funyg chg gurz hcba Nneba gul oebgure, naq uvf fbaf
jvgu uvz; naq funyg nabvag gurz, naq pbafrpengr gurz, naq fnapgvsl
gurz, gung gurl znl zvavfgre hagb zr va gur cevrfg'f bssvpr.

28:42 Naq gubh funyg znxr gurz yvara oerrpurf gb pbire gurve
anxrqarff; sebz gur ybvaf rira hagb gur guvtuf gurl funyy ernpu: 28:43
Naq gurl funyy or hcba Nneba, naq hcba uvf fbaf, jura gurl pbzr va
hagb gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, be jura gurl pbzr arne hagb
gur nygne gb zvavfgre va gur ubyl cynpr; gung gurl orne abg vavdhvgl,
naq qvr: vg funyy or n fgnghgr sbe rire hagb uvz naq uvf frrq nsgre
uvz.

29:1 Naq guvf vf gur guvat gung gubh funyg qb hagb gurz gb unyybj
gurz, gb zvavfgre hagb zr va gur cevrfg'f bssvpr: Gnxr bar lbhat
ohyybpx, naq gjb enzf jvgubhg oyrzvfu, 29:2 Naq hayrnirarq oernq, naq
pnxrf hayrnirarq grzcrerq jvgu bvy, naq jnsref hayrnirarq nabvagrq
jvgu bvy: bs jurngra sybhe funyg gubh znxr gurz.

29:3 Naq gubh funyg chg gurz vagb bar onfxrg, naq oevat gurz va gur
onfxrg, jvgu gur ohyybpx naq gur gjb enzf.

29:4 Naq Nneba naq uvf fbaf gubh funyg oevat hagb gur qbbe bs gur
gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, naq funyg jnfu gurz jvgu jngre.

29:5 Naq gubh funyg gnxr gur tnezragf, naq chg hcba Nneba gur pbng,
naq gur ebor bs gur rcubq, naq gur rcubq, naq gur oernfgcyngr, naq
tveq uvz jvgu gur phevbhf tveqyr bs gur rcubq: 29:6 Naq gubh funyg chg
gur zvger hcba uvf urnq, naq chg gur ubyl pebja hcba gur zvger.

29:7 Gura funyg gubh gnxr gur nabvagvat bvy, naq cbhe vg hcba uvf
urnq, naq nabvag uvz.

29:8 Naq gubh funyg oevat uvf fbaf, naq chg pbngf hcba gurz.

29:9 Naq gubh funyg tveq gurz jvgu tveqyrf, Nneba naq uvf fbaf, naq
chg gur obaargf ba gurz: naq gur cevrfg'f bssvpr funyy or gurvef sbe n
crecrghny fgnghgr: naq gubh funyg pbafrpengr Nneba naq uvf fbaf.

29:10 Naq gubh funyg pnhfr n ohyybpx gb or oebhtug orsber gur
gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba: naq Nneba naq uvf fbaf funyy chg gurve
unaqf hcba gur urnq bs gur ohyybpx.

29:11 Naq gubh funyg xvyy gur ohyybpx orsber gur YBEQ, ol gur qbbe bs
gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba.

29:12 Naq gubh funyg gnxr bs gur oybbq bs gur ohyybpx, naq chg vg hcba
gur ubeaf bs gur nygne jvgu gul svatre, naq cbhe nyy gur oybbq orfvqr
gur obggbz bs gur nygne.

29:13 Naq gubh funyg gnxr nyy gur sng gung pbirergu gur vajneqf, naq
gur pnhy gung vf nobir gur yvire, naq gur gjb xvqarlf, naq gur sng
gung vf hcba gurz, naq ohea gurz hcba gur nygne.

29:14 Ohg gur syrfu bs gur ohyybpx, naq uvf fxva, naq uvf qhat, funyg
gubh ohea jvgu sver jvgubhg gur pnzc: vg vf n fva bssrevat.

29:15 Gubh funyg nyfb gnxr bar enz; naq Nneba naq uvf fbaf funyy chg
gurve unaqf hcba gur urnq bs gur enz.

29:16 Naq gubh funyg fynl gur enz, naq gubh funyg gnxr uvf oybbq, naq
fcevaxyr vg ebhaq nobhg hcba gur nygne.

29:17 Naq gubh funyg phg gur enz va cvrprf, naq jnfu gur vajneqf bs
uvz, naq uvf yrtf, naq chg gurz hagb uvf cvrprf, naq hagb uvf urnq.

29:18 Naq gubh funyg ohea gur jubyr enz hcba gur nygne: vg vf n oheag
bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ: vg vf n fjrrg fnibhe, na bssrevat znqr ol sver
hagb gur YBEQ.

29:19 Naq gubh funyg gnxr gur bgure enz; naq Nneba naq uvf fbaf funyy
chg gurve unaqf hcba gur urnq bs gur enz.

29:20 Gura funyg gubh xvyy gur enz, naq gnxr bs uvf oybbq, naq chg vg
hcba gur gvc bs gur evtug rne bs Nneba, naq hcba gur gvc bs gur evtug
rne bs uvf fbaf, naq hcba gur guhzo bs gurve evtug unaq, naq hcba gur
terng gbr bs gurve evtug sbbg, naq fcevaxyr gur oybbq hcba gur nygne
ebhaq nobhg.

29:21 Naq gubh funyg gnxr bs gur oybbq gung vf hcba gur nygne, naq bs
gur nabvagvat bvy, naq fcevaxyr vg hcba Nneba, naq hcba uvf tnezragf,
naq hcba uvf fbaf, naq hcba gur tnezragf bs uvf fbaf jvgu uvz: naq ur
funyy or unyybjrq, naq uvf tnezragf, naq uvf fbaf, naq uvf fbaf'
tnezragf jvgu uvz.

29:22 Nyfb gubh funyg gnxr bs gur enz gur sng naq gur ehzc, naq gur
sng gung pbirergu gur vajneqf, naq gur pnhy nobir gur yvire, naq gur
gjb xvqarlf, naq gur sng gung vf hcba gurz, naq gur evtug fubhyqre;
sbe vg vf n enz bs pbafrpengvba: 29:23 Naq bar ybns bs oernq, naq bar
pnxr bs bvyrq oernq, naq bar jnsre bhg bs gur onfxrg bs gur hayrnirarq
oernq gung vf orsber gur YBEQ: 29:24 Naq gubh funyg chg nyy va gur
unaqf bs Nneba, naq va gur unaqf bs uvf fbaf; naq funyg jnir gurz sbe
n jnir bssrevat orsber gur YBEQ.

29:25 Naq gubh funyg erprvir gurz bs gurve unaqf, naq ohea gurz hcba
gur nygne sbe n oheag bssrevat, sbe n fjrrg fnibhe orsber gur YBEQ: vg
vf na bssrevat znqr ol sver hagb gur YBEQ.

29:26 Naq gubh funyg gnxr gur oernfg bs gur enz bs Nneba'f
pbafrpengvba, naq jnir vg sbe n jnir bssrevat orsber gur YBEQ: naq vg
funyy or gul cneg.

29:27 Naq gubh funyg fnapgvsl gur oernfg bs gur jnir bssrevat, naq gur
fubhyqre bs gur urnir bssrevat, juvpu vf jnirq, naq juvpu vf urnirq
hc, bs gur enz bs gur pbafrpengvba, rira bs gung juvpu vf sbe Nneba,
naq bs gung juvpu vf sbe uvf fbaf: 29:28 Naq vg funyy or Nneba'f naq
uvf fbaf' ol n fgnghgr sbe rire sebz gur puvyqera bs Vfenry: sbe vg vf
na urnir bssrevat: naq vg funyy or na urnir bssrevat sebz gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry bs gur fnpevsvpr bs gurve crnpr bssrevatf, rira gurve urnir
bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ.

29:29 Naq gur ubyl tnezragf bs Nneba funyy or uvf fbaf' nsgre uvz, gb
or nabvagrq gurerva, naq gb or pbafrpengrq va gurz.

29:30 Naq gung fba gung vf cevrfg va uvf fgrnq funyy chg gurz ba frira
qnlf, jura ur pbzrgu vagb gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba gb
zvavfgre va gur ubyl cynpr.

29:31 Naq gubh funyg gnxr gur enz bs gur pbafrpengvba, naq frrgur uvf
syrfu va gur ubyl cynpr.

29:32 Naq Nneba naq uvf fbaf funyy rng gur syrfu bs gur enz, naq gur
oernq gung vf va gur onfxrg ol gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba.

29:33 Naq gurl funyy rng gubfr guvatf jurerjvgu gur ngbarzrag jnf
znqr, gb pbafrpengr naq gb fnapgvsl gurz: ohg n fgenatre funyy abg rng
gurerbs, orpnhfr gurl ner ubyl.

29:34 Naq vs bhtug bs gur syrfu bs gur pbafrpengvbaf, be bs gur oernq,
erznva hagb gur zbeavat, gura gubh funyg ohea gur erznvaqre jvgu sver:
vg funyy abg or rngra, orpnhfr vg vf ubyl.

29:35 Naq guhf funyg gubh qb hagb Nneba, naq gb uvf fbaf, nppbeqvat gb
nyy guvatf juvpu V unir pbzznaqrq gurr: frira qnlf funyg gubh
pbafrpengr gurz.

29:36 Naq gubh funyg bssre rirel qnl n ohyybpx sbe n fva bssrevat sbe
ngbarzrag: naq gubh funyg pyrnafr gur nygne, jura gubh unfg znqr na
ngbarzrag sbe vg, naq gubh funyg nabvag vg, gb fnapgvsl vg.

29:37 Frira qnlf gubh funyg znxr na ngbarzrag sbe gur nygne, naq
fnapgvsl vg; naq vg funyy or na nygne zbfg ubyl: jungfbrire gbhpurgu
gur nygne funyy or ubyl.

29:38 Abj guvf vf gung juvpu gubh funyg bssre hcba gur nygne; gjb
ynzof bs gur svefg lrne qnl ol qnl pbagvahnyyl.

29:39 Gur bar ynzo gubh funyg bssre va gur zbeavat; naq gur bgure ynzo
gubh funyg bssre ng rira: 29:40 Naq jvgu gur bar ynzo n gragu qrny bs
sybhe zvatyrq jvgu gur sbhegu cneg bs na uva bs orngra bvy; naq gur
sbhegu cneg bs na uva bs jvar sbe n qevax bssrevat.

29:41 Naq gur bgure ynzo gubh funyg bssre ng rira, naq funyg qb
gurergb nppbeqvat gb gur zrng bssrevat bs gur zbeavat, naq nppbeqvat
gb gur qevax bssrevat gurerbs, sbe n fjrrg fnibhe, na bssrevat znqr ol
sver hagb gur YBEQ.

29:42 Guvf funyy or n pbagvahny oheag bssrevat guebhtubhg lbhe
trarengvbaf ng gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba orsber
gur YBEQ: jurer V jvyy zrrg lbh, gb fcrnx gurer hagb gurr.

29:43 Naq gurer V jvyy zrrg jvgu gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq gur
gnoreanpyr funyy or fnapgvsvrq ol zl tybel.

29:44 Naq V jvyy fnapgvsl gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, naq gur
nygne: V jvyy fnapgvsl nyfb obgu Nneba naq uvf fbaf, gb zvavfgre gb zr
va gur cevrfg'f bssvpr.

29:45 Naq V jvyy qjryy nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq jvyy or gurve
Tbq.

29:46 Naq gurl funyy xabj gung V nz gur YBEQ gurve Tbq, gung oebhtug
gurz sbegu bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, gung V znl qjryy nzbat gurz: V nz
gur YBEQ gurve Tbq.

30:1 Naq gubh funyg znxr na nygne gb ohea vaprafr hcba: bs fuvggvz
jbbq funyg gubh znxr vg.

30:2 N phovg funyy or gur yratgu gurerbs, naq n phovg gur oernqgu
gurerbs; sbhefdhner funyy vg or: naq gjb phovgf funyy or gur urvtug
gurerbs: gur ubeaf gurerbs funyy or bs gur fnzr.

30:3 Naq gubh funyg bireynl vg jvgu cher tbyq, gur gbc gurerbs, naq
gur fvqrf gurerbs ebhaq nobhg, naq gur ubeaf gurerbs; naq gubh funyg
znxr hagb vg n pebja bs tbyq ebhaq nobhg.

30:4 Naq gjb tbyqra evatf funyg gubh znxr gb vg haqre gur pebja bs vg,
ol gur gjb pbearef gurerbs, hcba gur gjb fvqrf bs vg funyg gubh znxr
vg; naq gurl funyy or sbe cynprf sbe gur fgnirf gb orne vg jvguny.

30:5 Naq gubh funyg znxr gur fgnirf bs fuvggvz jbbq, naq bireynl gurz
jvgu tbyq.

30:6 Naq gubh funyg chg vg orsber gur invy gung vf ol gur nex bs gur
grfgvzbal, orsber gur zrepl frng gung vf bire gur grfgvzbal, jurer V
jvyy zrrg jvgu gurr.

30:7 Naq Nneba funyy ohea gurerba fjrrg vaprafr rirel zbeavat: jura ur
qerffrgu gur ynzcf, ur funyy ohea vaprafr hcba vg.

30:8 Naq jura Nneba yvtugrgu gur ynzcf ng rira, ur funyy ohea vaprafr
hcba vg, n crecrghny vaprafr orsber gur YBEQ guebhtubhg lbhe
trarengvbaf.

30:9 Lr funyy bssre ab fgenatr vaprafr gurerba, abe oheag fnpevsvpr,
abe zrng bssrevat; arvgure funyy lr cbhe qevax bssrevat gurerba.

30:10 Naq Nneba funyy znxr na ngbarzrag hcba gur ubeaf bs vg bapr va n
lrne jvgu gur oybbq bs gur fva bssrevat bs ngbarzragf: bapr va gur
lrne funyy ur znxr ngbarzrag hcba vg guebhtubhg lbhe trarengvbaf: vg
vf zbfg ubyl hagb gur YBEQ.

30:11 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 30:12 Jura gubh gnxrfg
gur fhz bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry nsgre gurve ahzore, gura funyy gurl
tvir rirel zna n enafbz sbe uvf fbhy hagb gur YBEQ, jura gubh
ahzorerfg gurz; gung gurer or ab cynthr nzbat gurz, jura gubh
ahzorerfg gurz.

30:13 Guvf gurl funyy tvir, rirel bar gung cnffrgu nzbat gurz gung ner
ahzorerq, unys n furxry nsgre gur furxry bs gur fnapghnel: (n furxry
vf gjragl trenuf:) na unys furxry funyy or gur bssrevat bs gur YBEQ.

30:14 Rirel bar gung cnffrgu nzbat gurz gung ner ahzorerq, sebz gjragl
lrnef byq naq nobir, funyy tvir na bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ.

30:15 Gur evpu funyy abg tvir zber, naq gur cbbe funyy abg tvir yrff
guna unys n furxry, jura gurl tvir na bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ, gb znxr
na ngbarzrag sbe lbhe fbhyf.

30:16 Naq gubh funyg gnxr gur ngbarzrag zbarl bs gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, naq funyg nccbvag vg sbe gur freivpr bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba; gung vg znl or n zrzbevny hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry
orsber gur YBEQ, gb znxr na ngbarzrag sbe lbhe fbhyf.

30:17 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 30:18 Gubh funyg nyfb
znxr n ynire bs oenff, naq uvf sbbg nyfb bs oenff, gb jnfu jvguny: naq
gubh funyg chg vg orgjrra gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba naq gur
nygne, naq gubh funyg chg jngre gurerva.

30:19 Sbe Nneba naq uvf fbaf funyy jnfu gurve unaqf naq gurve srrg
gurerng: 30:20 Jura gurl tb vagb gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba,
gurl funyy jnfu jvgu jngre, gung gurl qvr abg; be jura gurl pbzr arne
gb gur nygne gb zvavfgre, gb ohea bssrevat znqr ol sver hagb gur YBEQ:
30:21 Fb gurl funyy jnfu gurve unaqf naq gurve srrg, gung gurl qvr
abg: naq vg funyy or n fgnghgr sbe rire gb gurz, rira gb uvz naq gb
uvf frrq guebhtubhg gurve trarengvbaf.

30:22 Zberbire gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 30:23 Gnxr gubh nyfb
hagb gurr cevapvcny fcvprf, bs cher zleeu svir uhaqerq furxryf, naq bs
fjrrg pvaanzba unys fb zhpu, rira gjb uhaqerq naq svsgl furxryf, naq
bs fjrrg pnynzhf gjb uhaqerq naq svsgl furxryf, 30:24 Naq bs pnffvn
svir uhaqerq furxryf, nsgre gur furxry bs gur fnapghnel, naq bs bvy
byvir na uva: 30:25 Naq gubh funyg znxr vg na bvy bs ubyl bvagzrag, na
bvagzrag pbzcbhaq nsgre gur neg bs gur ncbgurpnel: vg funyy or na ubyl
nabvagvat bvy.

30:26 Naq gubh funyg nabvag gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba
gurerjvgu, naq gur nex bs gur grfgvzbal, 30:27 Naq gur gnoyr naq nyy
uvf irffryf, naq gur pnaqyrfgvpx naq uvf irffryf, naq gur nygne bs
vaprafr, 30:28 Naq gur nygne bs oheag bssrevat jvgu nyy uvf irffryf,
naq gur ynire naq uvf sbbg.

30:29 Naq gubh funyg fnapgvsl gurz, gung gurl znl or zbfg ubyl:
jungfbrire gbhpurgu gurz funyy or ubyl.

30:30 Naq gubh funyg nabvag Nneba naq uvf fbaf, naq pbafrpengr gurz,
gung gurl znl zvavfgre hagb zr va gur cevrfg'f bssvpr.

30:31 Naq gubh funyg fcrnx hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Guvf
funyy or na ubyl nabvagvat bvy hagb zr guebhtubhg lbhe trarengvbaf.

30:32 Hcba zna'f syrfu funyy vg abg or cbherq, arvgure funyy lr znxr
nal bgure yvxr vg, nsgre gur pbzcbfvgvba bs vg: vg vf ubyl, naq vg
funyy or ubyl hagb lbh.

30:33 Jubfbrire pbzcbhaqrgu nal yvxr vg, be jubfbrire chggrgu nal bs
vg hcba n fgenatre, funyy rira or phg bss sebz uvf crbcyr.

30:34 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Gnxr hagb gurr fjrrg fcvprf,
fgnpgr, naq balpun, naq tnyonahz; gurfr fjrrg fcvprf jvgu cher
senaxvaprafr: bs rnpu funyy gurer or n yvxr jrvtug: 30:35 Naq gubh
funyg znxr vg n creshzr, n pbasrpgvba nsgre gur neg bs gur ncbgurpnel,
grzcrerq gbtrgure, cher naq ubyl: 30:36 Naq gubh funyg orng fbzr bs vg
irel fznyy, naq chg bs vg orsber gur grfgvzbal va gur gnoreanpyr bs
gur pbatertngvba, jurer V jvyy zrrg jvgu gurr: vg funyy or hagb lbh
zbfg ubyl.

30:37 Naq nf sbe gur creshzr juvpu gubh funyg znxr, lr funyy abg znxr
gb lbhefryirf nppbeqvat gb gur pbzcbfvgvba gurerbs: vg funyy or hagb
gurr ubyl sbe gur YBEQ.

30:38 Jubfbrire funyy znxr yvxr hagb gung, gb fzryy gurergb, funyy
rira or phg bss sebz uvf crbcyr.

31:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 31:2 Frr, V unir pnyyrq ol
anzr Ormnyrry gur fba bs Hev, gur fba bs Uhe, bs gur gevor bs Whqnu:
31:3 Naq V unir svyyrq uvz jvgu gur fcvevg bs Tbq, va jvfqbz, naq va
haqrefgnaqvat, naq va xabjyrqtr, naq va nyy znaare bs jbexznafuvc,
31:4 Gb qrivfr phaavat jbexf, gb jbex va tbyq, naq va fvyire, naq va
oenff, 31:5 Naq va phggvat bs fgbarf, gb frg gurz, naq va pneivat bs
gvzore, gb jbex va nyy znaare bs jbexznafuvc.

31:6 Naq V, orubyq, V unir tvira jvgu uvz Nubyvno, gur fba bs
Nuvfnznpu, bs gur gevor bs Qna: naq va gur urnegf bs nyy gung ner jvfr
urnegrq V unir chg jvfqbz, gung gurl znl znxr nyy gung V unir
pbzznaqrq gurr; 31:7 Gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, naq gur nex
bs gur grfgvzbal, naq gur zrepl frng gung vf gurerhcba, naq nyy gur
sheavgher bs gur gnoreanpyr, 31:8 Naq gur gnoyr naq uvf sheavgher, naq
gur cher pnaqyrfgvpx jvgu nyy uvf sheavgher, naq gur nygne bs vaprafr,
31:9 Naq gur nygne bs oheag bssrevat jvgu nyy uvf sheavgher, naq gur
ynire naq uvf sbbg, 31:10 Naq gur pybguf bs freivpr, naq gur ubyl
tnezragf sbe Nneba gur cevrfg, naq gur tnezragf bs uvf fbaf, gb
zvavfgre va gur cevrfg'f bssvpr, 31:11 Naq gur nabvagvat bvy, naq
fjrrg vaprafr sbe gur ubyl cynpr: nppbeqvat gb nyy gung V unir
pbzznaqrq gurr funyy gurl qb.

31:12 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 31:13 Fcrnx gubh nyfb
hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Irevyl zl fnoonguf lr funyy xrrc:
sbe vg vf n fvta orgjrra zr naq lbh guebhtubhg lbhe trarengvbaf; gung
lr znl xabj gung V nz gur YBEQ gung qbgu fnapgvsl lbh.

31:14 Lr funyy xrrc gur fnoongu gurersber; sbe vg vf ubyl hagb lbh:
rirel bar gung qrsvyrgu vg funyy fheryl or chg gb qrngu: sbe jubfbrire
qbrgu nal jbex gurerva, gung fbhy funyy or phg bss sebz nzbat uvf
crbcyr.

31:15 Fvk qnlf znl jbex or qbar; ohg va gur friragu vf gur fnoongu bs
erfg, ubyl gb gur YBEQ: jubfbrire qbrgu nal jbex va gur fnoongu qnl,
ur funyy fheryl or chg gb qrngu.

31:16 Jurersber gur puvyqera bs Vfenry funyy xrrc gur fnoongu, gb
bofreir gur fnoongu guebhtubhg gurve trarengvbaf, sbe n crecrghny
pbiranag.

31:17 Vg vf n fvta orgjrra zr naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry sbe rire: sbe
va fvk qnlf gur YBEQ znqr urnira naq rnegu, naq ba gur friragu qnl ur
erfgrq, naq jnf erserfurq.

31:18 Naq ur tnir hagb Zbfrf, jura ur unq znqr na raq bs pbzzhavat
jvgu uvz hcba zbhag Fvanv, gjb gnoyrf bs grfgvzbal, gnoyrf bs fgbar,
jevggra jvgu gur svatre bs Tbq.

32:1 Naq jura gur crbcyr fnj gung Zbfrf qrynlrq gb pbzr qbja bhg bs
gur zbhag, gur crbcyr tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure hagb Nneba, naq
fnvq hagb uvz, Hc, znxr hf tbqf, juvpu funyy tb orsber hf; sbe nf sbe
guvf Zbfrf, gur zna gung oebhtug hf hc bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, jr
jbg abg jung vf orpbzr bs uvz.

32:2 Naq Nneba fnvq hagb gurz, Oernx bss gur tbyqra rneevatf, juvpu
ner va gur rnef bs lbhe jvirf, bs lbhe fbaf, naq bs lbhe qnhtugref,
naq oevat gurz hagb zr.

32:3 Naq nyy gur crbcyr oenxr bss gur tbyqra rneevatf juvpu jrer va
gurve rnef, naq oebhtug gurz hagb Nneba.

32:4 Naq ur erprvirq gurz ng gurve unaq, naq snfuvbarq vg jvgu n
tenivat gbby, nsgre ur unq znqr vg n zbygra pnys: naq gurl fnvq, Gurfr
or gul tbqf, B Vfenry, juvpu oebhtug gurr hc bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

32:5 Naq jura Nneba fnj vg, ur ohvyg na nygne orsber vg; naq Nneba
znqr cebpynzngvba, naq fnvq, Gb zbeebj vf n srnfg gb gur YBEQ.

32:6 Naq gurl ebfr hc rneyl ba gur zbeebj, naq bssrerq oheag
bssrevatf, naq oebhtug crnpr bssrevatf; naq gur crbcyr fng qbja gb rng
naq gb qevax, naq ebfr hc gb cynl.

32:7 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Tb, trg gurr qbja; sbe gul crbcyr,
juvpu gubh oebhtugrfg bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, unir pbeehcgrq
gurzfryirf: 32:8 Gurl unir ghearq nfvqr dhvpxyl bhg bs gur jnl juvpu V
pbzznaqrq gurz: gurl unir znqr gurz n zbygra pnys, naq unir jbefuvccrq
vg, naq unir fnpevsvprq gurerhagb, naq fnvq, Gurfr or gul tbqf, B
Vfenry, juvpu unir oebhtug gurr hc bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

32:9 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, V unir frra guvf crbcyr, naq,
orubyq, vg vf n fgvssarpxrq crbcyr: 32:10 Abj gurersber yrg zr nybar,
gung zl jengu znl jnk ubg ntnvafg gurz, naq gung V znl pbafhzr gurz:
naq V jvyy znxr bs gurr n terng angvba.

32:11 Naq Zbfrf orfbhtug gur YBEQ uvf Tbq, naq fnvq, YBEQ, jul qbgu
gul jengu jnk ubg ntnvafg gul crbcyr, juvpu gubh unfg oebhtug sbegu
bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg jvgu terng cbjre, naq jvgu n zvtugl unaq?
32:12 Jurersber fubhyq gur Rtlcgvnaf fcrnx, naq fnl, Sbe zvfpuvrs qvq
ur oevat gurz bhg, gb fynl gurz va gur zbhagnvaf, naq gb pbafhzr gurz
sebz gur snpr bs gur rnegu? Ghea sebz gul svrepr jengu, naq ercrag bs
guvf rivy ntnvafg gul crbcyr.

32:13 Erzrzore Noenunz, Vfnnp, naq Vfenry, gul freinagf, gb jubz gubh
fjnerfg ol guvar bja frys, naq fnvqfg hagb gurz, V jvyy zhygvcyl lbhe
frrq nf gur fgnef bs urnira, naq nyy guvf ynaq gung V unir fcbxra bs
jvyy V tvir hagb lbhe frrq, naq gurl funyy vaurevg vg sbe rire.

32:14 Naq gur YBEQ ercragrq bs gur rivy juvpu ur gubhtug gb qb hagb
uvf crbcyr.

32:15 Naq Zbfrf ghearq, naq jrag qbja sebz gur zbhag, naq gur gjb
gnoyrf bs gur grfgvzbal jrer va uvf unaq: gur gnoyrf jrer jevggra ba
obgu gurve fvqrf; ba gur bar fvqr naq ba gur bgure jrer gurl jevggra.

32:16 Naq gur gnoyrf jrer gur jbex bs Tbq, naq gur jevgvat jnf gur
jevgvat bs Tbq, tenira hcba gur gnoyrf.

32:17 Naq jura Wbfuhn urneq gur abvfr bs gur crbcyr nf gurl fubhgrq,
ur fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Gurer vf n abvfr bs jne va gur pnzc.

32:18 Naq ur fnvq, Vg vf abg gur ibvpr bs gurz gung fubhg sbe znfgrel,
arvgure vf vg gur ibvpr bs gurz gung pel sbe orvat birepbzr: ohg gur
abvfr bs gurz gung fvat qb V urne.

32:19 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf fbba nf ur pnzr avtu hagb gur pnzc, gung
ur fnj gur pnys, naq gur qnapvat: naq Zbfrf' natre jnkrq ubg, naq ur
pnfg gur gnoyrf bhg bs uvf unaqf, naq oenxr gurz orarngu gur zbhag.

32:20 Naq ur gbbx gur pnys juvpu gurl unq znqr, naq oheag vg va gur
sver, naq tebhaq vg gb cbjqre, naq fgenjrq vg hcba gur jngre, naq znqr
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qevax bs vg.

32:21 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb Nneba, Jung qvq guvf crbcyr hagb gurr, gung
gubh unfg oebhtug fb terng n fva hcba gurz?  32:22 Naq Nneba fnvq, Yrg
abg gur natre bs zl ybeq jnk ubg: gubh xabjrfg gur crbcyr, gung gurl
ner frg ba zvfpuvrs.

32:23 Sbe gurl fnvq hagb zr, Znxr hf tbqf, juvpu funyy tb orsber hf:
sbe nf sbe guvf Zbfrf, gur zna gung oebhtug hf hc bhg bs gur ynaq bs
Rtlcg, jr jbg abg jung vf orpbzr bs uvz.

32:24 Naq V fnvq hagb gurz, Jubfbrire ungu nal tbyq, yrg gurz oernx vg
bss. Fb gurl tnir vg zr: gura V pnfg vg vagb gur sver, naq gurer pnzr
bhg guvf pnys.

32:25 Naq jura Zbfrf fnj gung gur crbcyr jrer anxrq; (sbe Nneba unq
znqr gurz anxrq hagb gurve funzr nzbat gurve rarzvrf:) 32:26 Gura
Zbfrf fgbbq va gur tngr bs gur pnzc, naq fnvq, Jub vf ba gur YBEQ'f
fvqr? yrg uvz pbzr hagb zr. Naq nyy gur fbaf bs Yriv tngurerq
gurzfryirf gbtrgure hagb uvz.

32:27 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, Chg
rirel zna uvf fjbeq ol uvf fvqr, naq tb va naq bhg sebz tngr gb tngr
guebhtubhg gur pnzc, naq fynl rirel zna uvf oebgure, naq rirel zna uvf
pbzcnavba, naq rirel zna uvf arvtuobhe.

32:28 Naq gur puvyqera bs Yriv qvq nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs Zbfrf: naq
gurer sryy bs gur crbcyr gung qnl nobhg guerr gubhfnaq zra.

32:29 Sbe Zbfrf unq fnvq, Pbafrpengr lbhefryirf gbqnl gb gur YBEQ,
rira rirel zna hcba uvf fba, naq hcba uvf oebgure; gung ur znl orfgbj
hcba lbh n oyrffvat guvf qnl.

32:30 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ba gur zbeebj, gung Zbfrf fnvq hagb gur
crbcyr, Lr unir fvaarq n terng fva: naq abj V jvyy tb hc hagb gur
YBEQ; crenqiragher V funyy znxr na ngbarzrag sbe lbhe fva.

32:31 Naq Zbfrf erghearq hagb gur YBEQ, naq fnvq, Bu, guvf crbcyr unir
fvaarq n terng fva, naq unir znqr gurz tbqf bs tbyq.

32:32 Lrg abj, vs gubh jvyg sbetvir gurve fva--; naq vs abg, oybg zr,
V cenl gurr, bhg bs gul obbx juvpu gubh unfg jevggra.

32:33 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Jubfbrire ungu fvaarq ntnvafg zr,
uvz jvyy V oybg bhg bs zl obbx.

32:34 Gurersber abj tb, yrnq gur crbcyr hagb gur cynpr bs juvpu V unir
fcbxra hagb gurr: orubyq, zvar Natry funyy tb orsber gurr:
arireguryrff va gur qnl jura V ivfvg V jvyy ivfvg gurve fva hcba gurz.

32:35 Naq gur YBEQ cynthrq gur crbcyr, orpnhfr gurl znqr gur pnys,
juvpu Nneba znqr.

33:1 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Qrcneg, naq tb hc urapr, gubh naq
gur crbcyr juvpu gubh unfg oebhtug hc bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, hagb
gur ynaq juvpu V fjner hagb Noenunz, gb Vfnnp, naq gb Wnpbo, fnlvat,
Hagb gul frrq jvyy V tvir vg: 33:2 Naq V jvyy fraq na natry orsber
gurr; naq V jvyy qevir bhg gur Pnannavgr, gur Nzbevgr, naq gur
Uvggvgr, naq gur Crevmmvgr, gur Uvivgr, naq gur Wrohfvgr: 33:3 Hagb n
ynaq sybjvat jvgu zvyx naq ubarl: sbe V jvyy abg tb hc va gur zvqfg bs
gurr; sbe gubh neg n fgvssarpxrq crbcyr: yrfg V pbafhzr gurr va gur
jnl.

33:4 Naq jura gur crbcyr urneq gurfr rivy gvqvatf, gurl zbhearq: naq
ab zna qvq chg ba uvz uvf beanzragf.

33:5 Sbe gur YBEQ unq fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Fnl hagb gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, Lr ner n fgvssarpxrq crbcyr: V jvyy pbzr hc vagb gur zvqfg bs
gurr va n zbzrag, naq pbafhzr gurr: gurersber abj chg bss gul
beanzragf sebz gurr, gung V znl xabj jung gb qb hagb gurr.

33:6 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry fgevccrq gurzfryirf bs gurve beanzragf
ol gur zbhag Ubero.

33:7 Naq Zbfrf gbbx gur gnoreanpyr, naq cvgpurq vg jvgubhg gur pnzc,
nsne bss sebz gur pnzc, naq pnyyrq vg gur Gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba. Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung rirel bar juvpu fbhtug gur
YBEQ jrag bhg hagb gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, juvpu jnf
jvgubhg gur pnzc.

33:8 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Zbfrf jrag bhg hagb gur gnoreanpyr,
gung nyy gur crbcyr ebfr hc, naq fgbbq rirel zna ng uvf grag qbbe, naq
ybbxrq nsgre Zbfrf, hagvy ur jnf tbar vagb gur gnoreanpyr.

33:9 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf Zbfrf ragrerq vagb gur gnoreanpyr, gur
pybhql cvyyne qrfpraqrq, naq fgbbq ng gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr, naq
gur Ybeq gnyxrq jvgu Zbfrf.

33:10 Naq nyy gur crbcyr fnj gur pybhql cvyyne fgnaq ng gur gnoreanpyr
qbbe: naq nyy gur crbcyr ebfr hc naq jbefuvccrq, rirel zna va uvf grag
qbbe.

33:11 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf snpr gb snpr, nf n zna fcrnxrgu
hagb uvf sevraq. Naq ur ghearq ntnva vagb gur pnzc: ohg uvf freinag
Wbfuhn, gur fba bs Aha, n lbhat zna, qrcnegrq abg bhg bs gur
gnoreanpyr.

33:12 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb gur YBEQ, Frr, gubh fnlrfg hagb zr, Oevat hc
guvf crbcyr: naq gubh unfg abg yrg zr xabj jubz gubh jvyg fraq jvgu
zr. Lrg gubh unfg fnvq, V xabj gurr ol anzr, naq gubh unfg nyfb sbhaq
tenpr va zl fvtug.

33:13 Abj gurersber, V cenl gurr, vs V unir sbhaq tenpr va gul fvtug,
furj zr abj gul jnl, gung V znl xabj gurr, gung V znl svaq tenpr va
gul fvtug: naq pbafvqre gung guvf angvba vf gul crbcyr.

33:14 Naq ur fnvq, Zl cerfrapr funyy tb jvgu gurr, naq V jvyy tvir
gurr erfg.

33:15 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Vs gul cerfrapr tb abg jvgu zr, pneel hf
abg hc urapr.

33:16 Sbe jurerva funyy vg or xabja urer gung V naq gul crbcyr unir
sbhaq tenpr va gul fvtug? vf vg abg va gung gubh tbrfg jvgu hf? fb
funyy jr or frcnengrq, V naq gul crbcyr, sebz nyy gur crbcyr gung ner
hcba gur snpr bs gur rnegu.

33:17 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, V jvyy qb guvf guvat nyfb gung
gubh unfg fcbxra: sbe gubh unfg sbhaq tenpr va zl fvtug, naq V xabj
gurr ol anzr.

33:18 Naq ur fnvq, V orfrrpu gurr, furj zr gul tybel.

33:19 Naq ur fnvq, V jvyy znxr nyy zl tbbqarff cnff orsber gurr, naq V
jvyy cebpynvz gur anzr bs gur YBEQ orsber gurr; naq jvyy or tenpvbhf
gb jubz V jvyy or tenpvbhf, naq jvyy furj zrepl ba jubz V jvyy furj
zrepl.

33:20 Naq ur fnvq, Gubh pnafg abg frr zl snpr: sbe gurer funyy ab zna
frr zr, naq yvir.

33:21 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq, Orubyq, gurer vf n cynpr ol zr, naq gubh
funyg fgnaq hcba n ebpx: 33:22 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, juvyr zl
tybel cnffrgu ol, gung V jvyy chg gurr va n pyvsg bs gur ebpx, naq
jvyy pbire gurr jvgu zl unaq juvyr V cnff ol: 33:23 Naq V jvyy gnxr
njnl zvar unaq, naq gubh funyg frr zl onpx cnegf: ohg zl snpr funyy
abg or frra.

34:1 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Urj gurr gjb gnoyrf bs fgbar yvxr
hagb gur svefg: naq V jvyy jevgr hcba gurfr gnoyrf gur jbeqf gung jrer
va gur svefg gnoyrf, juvpu gubh oenxrfg.

34:2 Naq or ernql va gur zbeavat, naq pbzr hc va gur zbeavat hagb
zbhag Fvanv, naq cerfrag gulfrys gurer gb zr va gur gbc bs gur zbhag.

34:3 Naq ab zna funyy pbzr hc jvgu gurr, arvgure yrg nal zna or frra
guebhtubhg nyy gur zbhag; arvgure yrg gur sybpxf abe ureqf srrq orsber
gung zbhag.

34:4 Naq ur urjrq gjb gnoyrf bs fgbar yvxr hagb gur svefg; naq Zbfrf
ebfr hc rneyl va gur zbeavat, naq jrag hc hagb zbhag Fvanv, nf gur
YBEQ unq pbzznaqrq uvz, naq gbbx va uvf unaq gur gjb gnoyrf bs fgbar.

34:5 Naq gur YBEQ qrfpraqrq va gur pybhq, naq fgbbq jvgu uvz gurer,
naq cebpynvzrq gur anzr bs gur YBEQ.

34:6 Naq gur YBEQ cnffrq ol orsber uvz, naq cebpynvzrq, Gur YBEQ, Gur
YBEQ Tbq, zrepvshy naq tenpvbhf, ybatfhssrevat, naq nohaqnag va
tbbqarff naq gehgu, 34:7 Xrrcvat zrepl sbe gubhfnaqf, sbetvivat
vavdhvgl naq genafterffvba naq fva, naq gung jvyy ol ab zrnaf pyrne
gur thvygl; ivfvgvat gur vavdhvgl bs gur snguref hcba gur puvyqera,
naq hcba gur puvyqera'f puvyqera, hagb gur guveq naq gb gur sbhegu
trarengvba.

34:8 Naq Zbfrf znqr unfgr, naq objrq uvf urnq gbjneq gur rnegu, naq
jbefuvccrq.

34:9 Naq ur fnvq, Vs abj V unir sbhaq tenpr va gul fvtug, B YBEQ, yrg
zl YBEQ, V cenl gurr, tb nzbat hf; sbe vg vf n fgvssarpxrq crbcyr; naq
cneqba bhe vavdhvgl naq bhe fva, naq gnxr hf sbe guvar vaurevgnapr.

34:10 Naq ur fnvq, Orubyq, V znxr n pbiranag: orsber nyy gul crbcyr V
jvyy qb zneiryf, fhpu nf unir abg orra qbar va nyy gur rnegu, abe va
nal angvba: naq nyy gur crbcyr nzbat juvpu gubh neg funyy frr gur jbex
bs gur YBEQ: sbe vg vf n greevoyr guvat gung V jvyy qb jvgu gurr.

34:11 Bofreir gubh gung juvpu V pbzznaq gurr guvf qnl: orubyq, V qevir
bhg orsber gurr gur Nzbevgr, naq gur Pnannavgr, naq gur Uvggvgr, naq
gur Crevmmvgr, naq gur Uvivgr, naq gur Wrohfvgr.

34:12 Gnxr urrq gb gulfrys, yrfg gubh znxr n pbiranag jvgu gur
vaunovgnagf bs gur ynaq juvgure gubh tbrfg, yrfg vg or sbe n faner va
gur zvqfg bs gurr: 34:13 Ohg lr funyy qrfgebl gurve nygnef, oernx
gurve vzntrf, naq phg qbja gurve tebirf: 34:14 Sbe gubh funyg jbefuvc
ab bgure tbq: sbe gur YBEQ, jubfr anzr vf Wrnybhf, vf n wrnybhf Tbq:
34:15 Yrfg gubh znxr n pbiranag jvgu gur vaunovgnagf bs gur ynaq, naq
gurl tb n jubevat nsgre gurve tbqf, naq qb fnpevsvpr hagb gurve tbqf,
naq bar pnyy gurr, naq gubh rng bs uvf fnpevsvpr; 34:16 Naq gubh gnxr
bs gurve qnhtugref hagb gul fbaf, naq gurve qnhtugref tb n jubevat
nsgre gurve tbqf, naq znxr gul fbaf tb n jubevat nsgre gurve tbqf.

34:17 Gubh funyg znxr gurr ab zbygra tbqf.

34:18 Gur srnfg bs hayrnirarq oernq funyg gubh xrrc. Frira qnlf gubh
funyg rng hayrnirarq oernq, nf V pbzznaqrq gurr, va gur gvzr bs gur
zbagu Novo: sbe va gur zbagu Novo gubh pnzrfg bhg sebz Rtlcg.

34:19 Nyy gung bcrargu gur zngevk vf zvar; naq rirel svefgyvat nzbat
gul pnggyr, jurgure bk be furrc, gung vf znyr.

34:20 Ohg gur svefgyvat bs na nff gubh funyg erqrrz jvgu n ynzo: naq
vs gubh erqrrz uvz abg, gura funyg gubh oernx uvf arpx. Nyy gur
svefgobea bs gul fbaf gubh funyg erqrrz. Naq abar funyy nccrne orsber
zr rzcgl.

34:21 Fvk qnlf gubh funyg jbex, ohg ba gur friragu qnl gubh funyg
erfg: va rnevat gvzr naq va uneirfg gubh funyg erfg.

34:22 Naq gubh funyg bofreir gur srnfg bs jrrxf, bs gur svefgsehvgf bs
jurng uneirfg, naq gur srnfg bs vatngurevat ng gur lrne'f raq.

34:23 Guevpr va gur lrne funyy nyy lbhe zrapuvyqera nccrne orsber gur
YBEQ Tbq, gur Tbq bs Vfenry.

34:24 Sbe V jvyy pnfg bhg gur angvbaf orsber gurr, naq raynetr gul
obeqref: arvgure funyy nal zna qrfver gul ynaq, jura gubh funyg tb hc
gb nccrne orsber gur YBEQ gul Tbq guevpr va gur lrne.

34:25 Gubh funyg abg bssre gur oybbq bs zl fnpevsvpr jvgu yrnira;
arvgure funyy gur fnpevsvpr bs gur srnfg bs gur cnffbire or yrsg hagb
gur zbeavat.

34:26 Gur svefg bs gur svefgsehvgf bs gul ynaq gubh funyg oevat hagb
gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq. Gubh funyg abg frrgur n xvq va uvf
zbgure'f zvyx.

34:27 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Jevgr gubh gurfr jbeqf: sbe nsgre
gur grabe bs gurfr jbeqf V unir znqr n pbiranag jvgu gurr naq jvgu
Vfenry.

34:28 Naq ur jnf gurer jvgu gur YBEQ sbegl qnlf naq sbegl avtugf; ur
qvq arvgure rng oernq, abe qevax jngre. Naq ur jebgr hcba gur gnoyrf
gur jbeqf bs gur pbiranag, gur gra pbzznaqzragf.

34:29 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Zbfrf pnzr qbja sebz zbhag Fvanv jvgu
gur gjb gnoyrf bs grfgvzbal va Zbfrf' unaq, jura ur pnzr qbja sebz gur
zbhag, gung Zbfrf jvfg abg gung gur fxva bs uvf snpr fubar juvyr ur
gnyxrq jvgu uvz.

34:30 Naq jura Nneba naq nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry fnj Zbfrf, orubyq,
gur fxva bs uvf snpr fubar; naq gurl jrer nsenvq gb pbzr avtu uvz.

34:31 Naq Zbfrf pnyyrq hagb gurz; naq Nneba naq nyy gur ehyref bs gur
pbatertngvba erghearq hagb uvz: naq Zbfrf gnyxrq jvgu gurz.

34:32 Naq nsgrejneq nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry pnzr avtu: naq ur tnir
gurz va pbzznaqzrag nyy gung gur YBEQ unq fcbxra jvgu uvz va zbhag
Fvanv.

34:33 Naq gvyy Zbfrf unq qbar fcrnxvat jvgu gurz, ur chg n invy ba uvf
snpr.

34:34 Ohg jura Zbfrf jrag va orsber gur YBEQ gb fcrnx jvgu uvz, ur
gbbx gur invy bss, hagvy ur pnzr bhg. Naq ur pnzr bhg, naq fcnxr hagb
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry gung juvpu ur jnf pbzznaqrq.

34:35 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry fnj gur snpr bs Zbfrf, gung gur fxva
bs Zbfrf' snpr fubar: naq Zbfrf chg gur invy hcba uvf snpr ntnva,
hagvy ur jrag va gb fcrnx jvgu uvz.

35:1 Naq Zbfrf tngurerq nyy gur pbatertngvba bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry
gbtrgure, naq fnvq hagb gurz, Gurfr ner gur jbeqf juvpu gur YBEQ ungu
pbzznaqrq, gung lr fubhyq qb gurz.

35:2 Fvk qnlf funyy jbex or qbar, ohg ba gur friragu qnl gurer funyy
or gb lbh na ubyl qnl, n fnoongu bs erfg gb gur YBEQ: jubfbrire qbrgu
jbex gurerva funyy or chg gb qrngu.

35:3 Lr funyy xvaqyr ab sver guebhtubhg lbhe unovgngvbaf hcba gur
fnoongu qnl.

35:4 Naq Zbfrf fcnxr hagb nyy gur pbatertngvba bs gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, fnlvat, Guvf vf gur guvat juvpu gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq, fnlvat,
35:5 Gnxr lr sebz nzbat lbh na bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ: jubfbrire vf bs
n jvyyvat urneg, yrg uvz oevat vg, na bssrevat bs gur YBEQ; tbyq, naq
fvyire, naq oenff, 35:6 Naq oyhr, naq checyr, naq fpneyrg, naq svar
yvara, naq tbngf' unve, 35:7 Naq enzf' fxvaf qlrq erq, naq onqtref'
fxvaf, naq fuvggvz jbbq, 35:8 Naq bvy sbe gur yvtug, naq fcvprf sbe
nabvagvat bvy, naq sbe gur fjrrg vaprafr, 35:9 Naq balk fgbarf, naq
fgbarf gb or frg sbe gur rcubq, naq sbe gur oernfgcyngr.

35:10 Naq rirel jvfr urnegrq nzbat lbh funyy pbzr, naq znxr nyy gung
gur YBEQ ungu pbzznaqrq; 35:11 Gur gnoreanpyr, uvf grag, naq uvf
pbirevat, uvf gnpurf, naq uvf obneqf, uvf onef, uvf cvyynef, naq uvf
fbpxrgf, 35:12 Gur nex, naq gur fgnirf gurerbs, jvgu gur zrepl frng,
naq gur invy bs gur pbirevat, 35:13 Gur gnoyr, naq uvf fgnirf, naq nyy
uvf irffryf, naq gur furjoernq, 35:14 Gur pnaqyrfgvpx nyfb sbe gur
yvtug, naq uvf sheavgher, naq uvf ynzcf, jvgu gur bvy sbe gur yvtug,
35:15 Naq gur vaprafr nygne, naq uvf fgnirf, naq gur nabvagvat bvy,
naq gur fjrrg vaprafr, naq gur unatvat sbe gur qbbe ng gur ragrevat va
bs gur gnoreanpyr, 35:16 Gur nygne bs oheag bssrevat, jvgu uvf oenfra
tengr, uvf fgnirf, naq nyy uvf irffryf, gur ynire naq uvf sbbg, 35:17
Gur unatvatf bs gur pbheg, uvf cvyynef, naq gurve fbpxrgf, naq gur
unatvat sbe gur qbbe bs gur pbheg, 35:18 Gur cvaf bs gur gnoreanpyr,
naq gur cvaf bs gur pbheg, naq gurve pbeqf, 35:19 Gur pybguf bs
freivpr, gb qb freivpr va gur ubyl cynpr, gur ubyl tnezragf sbe Nneba
gur cevrfg, naq gur tnezragf bs uvf fbaf, gb zvavfgre va gur cevrfg'f
bssvpr.

35:20 Naq nyy gur pbatertngvba bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qrcnegrq sebz
gur cerfrapr bs Zbfrf.

35:21 Naq gurl pnzr, rirel bar jubfr urneg fgveerq uvz hc, naq rirel
bar jubz uvf fcvevg znqr jvyyvat, naq gurl oebhtug gur YBEQ'f bssrevat
gb gur jbex bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, naq sbe nyy uvf
freivpr, naq sbe gur ubyl tnezragf.

35:22 Naq gurl pnzr, obgu zra naq jbzra, nf znal nf jrer jvyyvat
urnegrq, naq oebhtug oenpryrgf, naq rneevatf, naq evatf, naq gnoyrgf,
nyy wrjryf bs tbyq: naq rirel zna gung bssrerq bssrerq na bssrevat bs
tbyq hagb gur YBEQ.

35:23 Naq rirel zna, jvgu jubz jnf sbhaq oyhr, naq checyr, naq
fpneyrg, naq svar yvara, naq tbngf' unve, naq erq fxvaf bs enzf, naq
onqtref' fxvaf, oebhtug gurz.

35:24 Rirel bar gung qvq bssre na bssrevat bs fvyire naq oenff oebhtug
gur YBEQ'f bssrevat: naq rirel zna, jvgu jubz jnf sbhaq fuvggvz jbbq
sbe nal jbex bs gur freivpr, oebhtug vg.

35:25 Naq nyy gur jbzra gung jrer jvfr urnegrq qvq fcva jvgu gurve
unaqf, naq oebhtug gung juvpu gurl unq fcha, obgu bs oyhr, naq bs
checyr, naq bs fpneyrg, naq bs svar yvara.

35:26 Naq nyy gur jbzra jubfr urneg fgveerq gurz hc va jvfqbz fcha
tbngf' unve.

35:27 Naq gur ehyref oebhtug balk fgbarf, naq fgbarf gb or frg, sbe
gur rcubq, naq sbe gur oernfgcyngr; 35:28 Naq fcvpr, naq bvy sbe gur
yvtug, naq sbe gur nabvagvat bvy, naq sbe gur fjrrg vaprafr.

35:29 Gur puvyqera bs Vfenry oebhtug n jvyyvat bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ,
rirel zna naq jbzna, jubfr urneg znqr gurz jvyyvat gb oevat sbe nyy
znaare bs jbex, juvpu gur YBEQ unq pbzznaqrq gb or znqr ol gur unaq bs
Zbfrf.

35:30 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, Frr, gur YBEQ ungu
pnyyrq ol anzr Ormnyrry gur fba bs Hev, gur fba bs Uhe, bs gur gevor
bs Whqnu; 35:31 Naq ur ungu svyyrq uvz jvgu gur fcvevg bs Tbq, va
jvfqbz, va haqrefgnaqvat, naq va xabjyrqtr, naq va nyy znaare bs
jbexznafuvc; 35:32 Naq gb qrivfr phevbhf jbexf, gb jbex va tbyq, naq
va fvyire, naq va oenff, 35:33 Naq va gur phggvat bs fgbarf, gb frg
gurz, naq va pneivat bs jbbq, gb znxr nal znaare bs phaavat jbex.

35:34 Naq ur ungu chg va uvf urneg gung ur znl grnpu, obgu ur, naq
Nubyvno, gur fba bs Nuvfnznpu, bs gur gevor bs Qna.

35:35 Gurz ungu ur svyyrq jvgu jvfqbz bs urneg, gb jbex nyy znaare bs
jbex, bs gur ratenire, naq bs gur phaavat jbexzna, naq bs gur
rzoebvqrere, va oyhr, naq va checyr, va fpneyrg, naq va svar yvara,
naq bs gur jrnire, rira bs gurz gung qb nal jbex, naq bs gubfr gung
qrivfr phaavat jbex.

36:1 Gura jebhtug Ormnyrry naq Nubyvno, naq rirel jvfr urnegrq zna, va
jubz gur YBEQ chg jvfqbz naq haqrefgnaqvat gb xabj ubj gb jbex nyy
znaare bs jbex sbe gur freivpr bs gur fnapghnel, nppbeqvat gb nyy gung
gur YBEQ unq pbzznaqrq.

36:2 Naq Zbfrf pnyyrq Ormnyrry naq Nubyvno, naq rirel jvfr urnegrq
zna, va jubfr urneg gur YBEQ unq chg jvfqbz, rira rirel bar jubfr
urneg fgveerq uvz hc gb pbzr hagb gur jbex gb qb vg: 36:3 Naq gurl
erprvirq bs Zbfrf nyy gur bssrevat, juvpu gur puvyqera bs Vfenry unq
oebhtug sbe gur jbex bs gur freivpr bs gur fnapghnel, gb znxr vg
jvguny. Naq gurl oebhtug lrg hagb uvz serr bssrevatf rirel zbeavat.

36:4 Naq nyy gur jvfr zra, gung jebhtug nyy gur jbex bs gur fnapghnel,
pnzr rirel zna sebz uvf jbex juvpu gurl znqr; 36:5 Naq gurl fcnxr hagb
Zbfrf, fnlvat, Gur crbcyr oevat zhpu zber guna rabhtu sbe gur freivpr
bs gur jbex, juvpu gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq gb znxr.

36:6 Naq Zbfrf tnir pbzznaqzrag, naq gurl pnhfrq vg gb or cebpynvzrq
guebhtubhg gur pnzc, fnlvat, Yrg arvgure zna abe jbzna znxr nal zber
jbex sbe gur bssrevat bs gur fnapghnel. Fb gur crbcyr jrer erfgenvarq
sebz oevatvat.

36:7 Sbe gur fghss gurl unq jnf fhssvpvrag sbe nyy gur jbex gb znxr
vg, naq gbb zhpu.

36:8 Naq rirel jvfr urnegrq zna nzbat gurz gung jebhtug gur jbex bs
gur gnoreanpyr znqr gra phegnvaf bs svar gjvarq yvara, naq oyhr, naq
checyr, naq fpneyrg: jvgu purehovzf bs phaavat jbex znqr ur gurz.

36:9 Gur yratgu bs bar phegnva jnf gjragl naq rvtug phovgf, naq gur
oernqgu bs bar phegnva sbhe phovgf: gur phegnvaf jrer nyy bs bar fvmr.

36:10 Naq ur pbhcyrq gur svir phegnvaf bar hagb nabgure: naq gur bgure
svir phegnvaf ur pbhcyrq bar hagb nabgure.

36:11 Naq ur znqr ybbcf bs oyhr ba gur rqtr bs bar phegnva sebz gur
fryirqtr va gur pbhcyvat: yvxrjvfr ur znqr va gur hggrezbfg fvqr bs
nabgure phegnva, va gur pbhcyvat bs gur frpbaq.

36:12 Svsgl ybbcf znqr ur va bar phegnva, naq svsgl ybbcf znqr ur va
gur rqtr bs gur phegnva juvpu jnf va gur pbhcyvat bs gur frpbaq: gur
ybbcf uryq bar phegnva gb nabgure.

36:13 Naq ur znqr svsgl gnpurf bs tbyq, naq pbhcyrq gur phegnvaf bar
hagb nabgure jvgu gur gnpurf: fb vg orpnzr bar gnoreanpyr.

36:14 Naq ur znqr phegnvaf bs tbngf' unve sbe gur grag bire gur
gnoreanpyr: ryrira phegnvaf ur znqr gurz.

36:15 Gur yratgu bs bar phegnva jnf guvegl phovgf, naq sbhe phovgf jnf
gur oernqgu bs bar phegnva: gur ryrira phegnvaf jrer bs bar fvmr.

36:16 Naq ur pbhcyrq svir phegnvaf ol gurzfryirf, naq fvk phegnvaf ol
gurzfryirf.

36:17 Naq ur znqr svsgl ybbcf hcba gur hggrezbfg rqtr bs gur phegnva
va gur pbhcyvat, naq svsgl ybbcf znqr ur hcba gur rqtr bs gur phegnva
juvpu pbhcyrgu gur frpbaq.

36:18 Naq ur znqr svsgl gnpurf bs oenff gb pbhcyr gur grag gbtrgure,
gung vg zvtug or bar.

36:19 Naq ur znqr n pbirevat sbe gur grag bs enzf' fxvaf qlrq erq, naq
n pbirevat bs onqtref' fxvaf nobir gung.

36:20 Naq ur znqr obneqf sbe gur gnoreanpyr bs fuvggvz jbbq, fgnaqvat
hc.

36:21 Gur yratgu bs n obneq jnf gra phovgf, naq gur oernqgu bs n obneq
bar phovg naq n unys.

36:22 Bar obneq unq gjb grabaf, rdhnyyl qvfgnag bar sebz nabgure: guhf
qvq ur znxr sbe nyy gur obneqf bs gur gnoreanpyr.

36:23 Naq ur znqr obneqf sbe gur gnoreanpyr; gjragl obneqf sbe gur
fbhgu fvqr fbhgujneq: 36:24 Naq sbegl fbpxrgf bs fvyire ur znqr haqre
gur gjragl obneqf; gjb fbpxrgf haqre bar obneq sbe uvf gjb grabaf, naq
gjb fbpxrgf haqre nabgure obneq sbe uvf gjb grabaf.

36:25 Naq sbe gur bgure fvqr bs gur gnoreanpyr, juvpu vf gbjneq gur
abegu pbeare, ur znqr gjragl obneqf, 36:26 Naq gurve sbegl fbpxrgf bs
fvyire; gjb fbpxrgf haqre bar obneq, naq gjb fbpxrgf haqre nabgure
obneq.

36:27 Naq sbe gur fvqrf bs gur gnoreanpyr jrfgjneq ur znqr fvk obneqf.

36:28 Naq gjb obneqf znqr ur sbe gur pbearef bs gur gnoreanpyr va gur
gjb fvqrf.

36:29 Naq gurl jrer pbhcyrq orarngu, naq pbhcyrq gbtrgure ng gur urnq
gurerbs, gb bar evat: guhf ur qvq gb obgu bs gurz va obgu gur pbearef.

36:30 Naq gurer jrer rvtug obneqf; naq gurve fbpxrgf jrer fvkgrra
fbpxrgf bs fvyire, haqre rirel obneq gjb fbpxrgf.

36:31 Naq ur znqr onef bs fuvggvz jbbq; svir sbe gur obneqf bs gur bar
fvqr bs gur gnoreanpyr, 36:32 Naq svir onef sbe gur obneqf bs gur
bgure fvqr bs gur gnoreanpyr, naq svir onef sbe gur obneqf bs gur
gnoreanpyr sbe gur fvqrf jrfgjneq.

36:33 Naq ur znqr gur zvqqyr one gb fubbg guebhtu gur obneqf sebz gur
bar raq gb gur bgure.

36:34 Naq ur bireynvq gur obneqf jvgu tbyq, naq znqr gurve evatf bs
tbyq gb or cynprf sbe gur onef, naq bireynvq gur onef jvgu tbyq.

36:35 Naq ur znqr n invy bs oyhr, naq checyr, naq fpneyrg, naq svar
gjvarq yvara: jvgu purehovzf znqr ur vg bs phaavat jbex.

36:36 Naq ur znqr gurerhagb sbhe cvyynef bs fuvggvz jbbq, naq bireynvq
gurz jvgu tbyq: gurve ubbxf jrer bs tbyq; naq ur pnfg sbe gurz sbhe
fbpxrgf bs fvyire.

36:37 Naq ur znqr na unatvat sbe gur gnoreanpyr qbbe bs oyhr, naq
checyr, naq fpneyrg, naq svar gjvarq yvara, bs arrqyrjbex; 36:38 Naq
gur svir cvyynef bs vg jvgu gurve ubbxf: naq ur bireynvq gurve
puncvgref naq gurve svyyrgf jvgu tbyq: ohg gurve svir fbpxrgf jrer bs
oenff.

37:1 Naq Ormnyrry znqr gur nex bs fuvggvz jbbq: gjb phovgf naq n unys
jnf gur yratgu bs vg, naq n phovg naq n unys gur oernqgu bs vg, naq n
phovg naq n unys gur urvtug bs vg: 37:2 Naq ur bireynvq vg jvgu cher
tbyq jvguva naq jvgubhg, naq znqr n pebja bs tbyq gb vg ebhaq nobhg.

37:3 Naq ur pnfg sbe vg sbhe evatf bs tbyq, gb or frg ol gur sbhe
pbearef bs vg; rira gjb evatf hcba gur bar fvqr bs vg, naq gjb evatf
hcba gur bgure fvqr bs vg.

37:4 Naq ur znqr fgnirf bs fuvggvz jbbq, naq bireynvq gurz jvgu tbyq.

37:5 Naq ur chg gur fgnirf vagb gur evatf ol gur fvqrf bs gur nex, gb
orne gur nex.

37:6 Naq ur znqr gur zrepl frng bs cher tbyq: gjb phovgf naq n unys
jnf gur yratgu gurerbs, naq bar phovg naq n unys gur oernqgu gurerbs.

37:7 Naq ur znqr gjb purehovzf bs tbyq, orngra bhg bs bar cvrpr znqr
ur gurz, ba gur gjb raqf bs gur zrepl frng; 37:8 Bar pureho ba gur raq
ba guvf fvqr, naq nabgure pureho ba gur bgure raq ba gung fvqr: bhg bs
gur zrepl frng znqr ur gur purehovzf ba gur gjb raqf gurerbs.

37:9 Naq gur purehovzf fcernq bhg gurve jvatf ba uvtu, naq pbirerq
jvgu gurve jvatf bire gur zrepl frng, jvgu gurve snprf bar gb nabgure;
rira gb gur zrepl frngjneq jrer gur snprf bs gur purehovzf.

37:10 Naq ur znqr gur gnoyr bs fuvggvz jbbq: gjb phovgf jnf gur yratgu
gurerbs, naq n phovg gur oernqgu gurerbs, naq n phovg naq n unys gur
urvtug gurerbs: 37:11 Naq ur bireynvq vg jvgu cher tbyq, naq znqr
gurerhagb n pebja bs tbyq ebhaq nobhg.

37:12 Nyfb ur znqr gurerhagb n obeqre bs na unaqoernqgu ebhaq nobhg;
naq znqr n pebja bs tbyq sbe gur obeqre gurerbs ebhaq nobhg.

37:13 Naq ur pnfg sbe vg sbhe evatf bs tbyq, naq chg gur evatf hcba
gur sbhe pbearef gung jrer va gur sbhe srrg gurerbs.

37:14 Bire ntnvafg gur obeqre jrer gur evatf, gur cynprf sbe gur
fgnirf gb orne gur gnoyr.

37:15 Naq ur znqr gur fgnirf bs fuvggvz jbbq, naq bireynvq gurz jvgu
tbyq, gb orne gur gnoyr.

37:16 Naq ur znqr gur irffryf juvpu jrer hcba gur gnoyr, uvf qvfurf,
naq uvf fcbbaf, naq uvf objyf, naq uvf pbiref gb pbire jvguny, bs cher
tbyq.

37:17 Naq ur znqr gur pnaqyrfgvpx bs cher tbyq: bs orngra jbex znqr ur
gur pnaqyrfgvpx; uvf funsg, naq uvf oenapu, uvf objyf, uvf xabcf, naq
uvf sybjref, jrer bs gur fnzr: 37:18 Naq fvk oenapurf tbvat bhg bs gur
fvqrf gurerbs; guerr oenapurf bs gur pnaqyrfgvpx bhg bs gur bar fvqr
gurerbs, naq guerr oenapurf bs gur pnaqyrfgvpx bhg bs gur bgure fvqr
gurerbs: 37:19 Guerr objyf znqr nsgre gur snfuvba bs nyzbaqf va bar
oenapu, n xabc naq n sybjre; naq guerr objyf znqr yvxr nyzbaqf va
nabgure oenapu, n xabc naq n sybjre: fb guebhtubhg gur fvk oenapurf
tbvat bhg bs gur pnaqyrfgvpx.

37:20 Naq va gur pnaqyrfgvpx jrer sbhe objyf znqr yvxr nyzbaqf, uvf
xabcf, naq uvf sybjref: 37:21 Naq n xabc haqre gjb oenapurf bs gur
fnzr, naq n xabc haqre gjb oenapurf bs gur fnzr, naq n xabc haqre gjb
oenapurf bs gur fnzr, nppbeqvat gb gur fvk oenapurf tbvat bhg bs vg.

37:22 Gurve xabcf naq gurve oenapurf jrer bs gur fnzr: nyy bs vg jnf
bar orngra jbex bs cher tbyq.

37:23 Naq ur znqr uvf frira ynzcf, naq uvf fahssref, naq uvf
fahssqvfurf, bs cher tbyq.

37:24 Bs n gnyrag bs cher tbyq znqr ur vg, naq nyy gur irffryf
gurerbs.

37:25 Naq ur znqr gur vaprafr nygne bs fuvggvz jbbq: gur yratgu bs vg
jnf n phovg, naq gur oernqgu bs vg n phovg; vg jnf sbhefdhner; naq gjb
phovgf jnf gur urvtug bs vg; gur ubeaf gurerbs jrer bs gur fnzr.

37:26 Naq ur bireynvq vg jvgu cher tbyq, obgu gur gbc bs vg, naq gur
fvqrf gurerbs ebhaq nobhg, naq gur ubeaf bs vg: nyfb ur znqr hagb vg n
pebja bs tbyq ebhaq nobhg.

37:27 Naq ur znqr gjb evatf bs tbyq sbe vg haqre gur pebja gurerbs, ol
gur gjb pbearef bs vg, hcba gur gjb fvqrf gurerbs, gb or cynprf sbe
gur fgnirf gb orne vg jvguny.

37:28 Naq ur znqr gur fgnirf bs fuvggvz jbbq, naq bireynvq gurz jvgu
tbyq.

37:29 Naq ur znqr gur ubyl nabvagvat bvy, naq gur cher vaprafr bs
fjrrg fcvprf, nppbeqvat gb gur jbex bs gur ncbgurpnel.

38:1 Naq ur znqr gur nygne bs oheag bssrevat bs fuvggvz jbbq: svir
phovgf jnf gur yratgu gurerbs, naq svir phovgf gur oernqgu gurerbs; vg
jnf sbhefdhner; naq guerr phovgf gur urvtug gurerbs.

38:2 Naq ur znqr gur ubeaf gurerbs ba gur sbhe pbearef bs vg; gur
ubeaf gurerbs jrer bs gur fnzr: naq ur bireynvq vg jvgu oenff.

38:3 Naq ur znqr nyy gur irffryf bs gur nygne, gur cbgf, naq gur
fubiryf, naq gur onfbaf, naq gur syrfuubbxf, naq gur svercnaf: nyy gur
irffryf gurerbs znqr ur bs oenff.

38:4 Naq ur znqr sbe gur nygne n oenfra tengr bs argjbex haqre gur
pbzcnff gurerbs orarngu hagb gur zvqfg bs vg.

38:5 Naq ur pnfg sbhe evatf sbe gur sbhe raqf bs gur tengr bs oenff,
gb or cynprf sbe gur fgnirf.

38:6 Naq ur znqr gur fgnirf bs fuvggvz jbbq, naq bireynvq gurz jvgu
oenff.

38:7 Naq ur chg gur fgnirf vagb gur evatf ba gur fvqrf bs gur nygne,
gb orne vg jvguny; ur znqr gur nygne ubyybj jvgu obneqf.

38:8 Naq ur znqr gur ynire bs oenff, naq gur sbbg bs vg bs oenff, bs
gur ybbxvattynffrf bs gur jbzra nffrzoyvat, juvpu nffrzoyrq ng gur
qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba.

38:9 Naq ur znqr gur pbheg: ba gur fbhgu fvqr fbhgujneq gur unatvatf
bs gur pbheg jrer bs svar gjvarq yvara, na uhaqerq phovgf: 38:10 Gurve
cvyynef jrer gjragl, naq gurve oenfra fbpxrgf gjragl; gur ubbxf bs gur
cvyynef naq gurve svyyrgf jrer bs fvyire.

38:11 Naq sbe gur abegu fvqr gur unatvatf jrer na uhaqerq phovgf,
gurve cvyynef jrer gjragl, naq gurve fbpxrgf bs oenff gjragl; gur
ubbxf bs gur cvyynef naq gurve svyyrgf bs fvyire.

38:12 Naq sbe gur jrfg fvqr jrer unatvatf bs svsgl phovgf, gurve
cvyynef gra, naq gurve fbpxrgf gra; gur ubbxf bs gur cvyynef naq gurve
svyyrgf bs fvyire.

38:13 Naq sbe gur rnfg fvqr rnfgjneq svsgl phovgf.

38:14 Gur unatvatf bs gur bar fvqr bs gur tngr jrer svsgrra phovgf;
gurve cvyynef guerr, naq gurve fbpxrgf guerr.

38:15 Naq sbe gur bgure fvqr bs gur pbheg tngr, ba guvf unaq naq gung
unaq, jrer unatvatf bs svsgrra phovgf; gurve cvyynef guerr, naq gurve
fbpxrgf guerr.

38:16 Nyy gur unatvatf bs gur pbheg ebhaq nobhg jrer bs svar gjvarq
yvara.

38:17 Naq gur fbpxrgf sbe gur cvyynef jrer bs oenff; gur ubbxf bs gur
cvyynef naq gurve svyyrgf bs fvyire; naq gur bireynlvat bs gurve
puncvgref bs fvyire; naq nyy gur cvyynef bs gur pbheg jrer svyyrgrq
jvgu fvyire.

38:18 Naq gur unatvat sbe gur tngr bs gur pbheg jnf arrqyrjbex, bs
oyhr, naq checyr, naq fpneyrg, naq svar gjvarq yvara: naq gjragl
phovgf jnf gur yratgu, naq gur urvtug va gur oernqgu jnf svir phovgf,
nafjrenoyr gb gur unatvatf bs gur pbheg.

38:19 Naq gurve cvyynef jrer sbhe, naq gurve fbpxrgf bs oenff sbhe;
gurve ubbxf bs fvyire, naq gur bireynlvat bs gurve puncvgref naq gurve
svyyrgf bs fvyire.

38:20 Naq nyy gur cvaf bs gur gnoreanpyr, naq bs gur pbheg ebhaq
nobhg, jrer bs oenff.

38:21 Guvf vf gur fhz bs gur gnoreanpyr, rira bs gur gnoreanpyr bs
grfgvzbal, nf vg jnf pbhagrq, nppbeqvat gb gur pbzznaqzrag bs Zbfrf,
sbe gur freivpr bs gur Yrivgrf, ol gur unaq bs Vgunzne, fba gb Nneba
gur cevrfg.

38:22 Naq Ormnyrry gur fba Hev, gur fba bs Uhe, bs gur gevor bs Whqnu,
znqr nyy gung gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

38:23 Naq jvgu uvz jnf Nubyvno, fba bs Nuvfnznpu, bs gur gevor bs Qna,
na ratenire, naq n phaavat jbexzna, naq na rzoebvqrere va oyhr, naq va
checyr, naq va fpneyrg, naq svar yvara.

38:24 Nyy gur tbyq gung jnf bpphcvrq sbe gur jbex va nyy gur jbex bs
gur ubyl cynpr, rira gur tbyq bs gur bssrevat, jnf gjragl naq avar
gnyragf, naq frira uhaqerq naq guvegl furxryf, nsgre gur furxry bs gur
fnapghnel.

38:25 Naq gur fvyire bs gurz gung jrer ahzorerq bs gur pbatertngvba
jnf na uhaqerq gnyragf, naq n gubhfnaq frira uhaqerq naq guerrfpber
naq svsgrra furxryf, nsgre gur furxry bs gur fnapghnel: 38:26 N orxnu
sbe rirel zna, gung vf, unys n furxry, nsgre gur furxry bs gur
fnapghnel, sbe rirel bar gung jrag gb or ahzorerq, sebz gjragl lrnef
byq naq hcjneq, sbe fvk uhaqerq gubhfnaq naq guerr gubhfnaq naq svir
uhaqerq naq svsgl zra.

38:27 Naq bs gur uhaqerq gnyragf bs fvyire jrer pnfg gur fbpxrgf bs
gur fnapghnel, naq gur fbpxrgf bs gur invy; na uhaqerq fbpxrgf bs gur
uhaqerq gnyragf, n gnyrag sbe n fbpxrg.

38:28 Naq bs gur gubhfnaq frira uhaqerq friragl naq svir furxryf ur
znqr ubbxf sbe gur cvyynef, naq bireynvq gurve puncvgref, naq svyyrgrq
gurz.

38:29 Naq gur oenff bs gur bssrevat jnf friragl gnyragf, naq gjb
gubhfnaq naq sbhe uhaqerq furxryf.

38:30 Naq gurerjvgu ur znqr gur fbpxrgf gb gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr
bs gur pbatertngvba, naq gur oenfra nygne, naq gur oenfra tengr sbe
vg, naq nyy gur irffryf bs gur nygne, 38:31 Naq gur fbpxrgf bs gur
pbheg ebhaq nobhg, naq gur fbpxrgf bs gur pbheg tngr, naq nyy gur cvaf
bs gur gnoreanpyr, naq nyy gur cvaf bs gur pbheg ebhaq nobhg.

39:1 Naq bs gur oyhr, naq checyr, naq fpneyrg, gurl znqr pybguf bs
freivpr, gb qb freivpr va gur ubyl cynpr, naq znqr gur ubyl tnezragf
sbe Nneba; nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

39:2 Naq ur znqr gur rcubq bs tbyq, oyhr, naq checyr, naq fpneyrg, naq
svar gjvarq yvara.

39:3 Naq gurl qvq orng gur tbyq vagb guva cyngrf, naq phg vg vagb
jverf, gb jbex vg va gur oyhr, naq va gur checyr, naq va gur fpneyrg,
naq va gur svar yvara, jvgu phaavat jbex.

39:4 Gurl znqr fubhyqrecvrprf sbe vg, gb pbhcyr vg gbtrgure: ol gur
gjb rqtrf jnf vg pbhcyrq gbtrgure.

39:5 Naq gur phevbhf tveqyr bs uvf rcubq, gung jnf hcba vg, jnf bs gur
fnzr, nppbeqvat gb gur jbex gurerbs; bs tbyq, oyhr, naq checyr, naq
fpneyrg, naq svar gjvarq yvara; nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

39:6 Naq gurl jebhtug balk fgbarf vapybfrq va bhpurf bs tbyq, tenira,
nf fvtargf ner tenira, jvgu gur anzrf bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

39:7 Naq ur chg gurz ba gur fubhyqref bs gur rcubq, gung gurl fubhyq
or fgbarf sbe n zrzbevny gb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry; nf gur YBEQ
pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

39:8 Naq ur znqr gur oernfgcyngr bs phaavat jbex, yvxr gur jbex bs gur
rcubq; bs tbyq, oyhr, naq checyr, naq fpneyrg, naq svar gjvarq yvara.

39:9 Vg jnf sbhefdhner; gurl znqr gur oernfgcyngr qbhoyr: n fcna jnf
gur yratgu gurerbs, naq n fcna gur oernqgu gurerbs, orvat qbhoyrq.

39:10 Naq gurl frg va vg sbhe ebjf bs fgbarf: gur svefg ebj jnf n
fneqvhf, n gbcnm, naq n pneohapyr: guvf jnf gur svefg ebj.

39:11 Naq gur frpbaq ebj, na rzrenyq, n fnccuver, naq n qvnzbaq.

39:12 Naq gur guveq ebj, n yvther, na ntngr, naq na nzrgulfg.

39:13 Naq gur sbhegu ebj, n orely, na balk, naq n wnfcre: gurl jrer
vapybfrq va bhpurf bs tbyq va gurve vapybfvatf.

39:14 Naq gur fgbarf jrer nppbeqvat gb gur anzrf bs gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, gjryir, nppbeqvat gb gurve anzrf, yvxr gur ratenivatf bs n
fvtarg, rirel bar jvgu uvf anzr, nppbeqvat gb gur gjryir gevorf.

39:15 Naq gurl znqr hcba gur oernfgcyngr punvaf ng gur raqf, bs
jerngura jbex bs cher tbyq.

39:16 Naq gurl znqr gjb bhpurf bs tbyq, naq gjb tbyq evatf; naq chg
gur gjb evatf va gur gjb raqf bs gur oernfgcyngr.

39:17 Naq gurl chg gur gjb jerngura punvaf bs tbyq va gur gjb evatf ba
gur raqf bs gur oernfgcyngr.

39:18 Naq gur gjb raqf bs gur gjb jerngura punvaf gurl snfgrarq va gur
gjb bhpurf, naq chg gurz ba gur fubhyqrecvrprf bs gur rcubq, orsber
vg.

39:19 Naq gurl znqr gjb evatf bs tbyq, naq chg gurz ba gur gjb raqf bs
gur oernfgcyngr, hcba gur obeqre bs vg, juvpu jnf ba gur fvqr bs gur
rcubq vajneq.

39:20 Naq gurl znqr gjb bgure tbyqra evatf, naq chg gurz ba gur gjb
fvqrf bs gur rcubq haqrearngu, gbjneq gur sbercneg bs vg, bire ntnvafg
gur bgure pbhcyvat gurerbs, nobir gur phevbhf tveqyr bs gur rcubq.

39:21 Naq gurl qvq ovaq gur oernfgcyngr ol uvf evatf hagb gur evatf bs
gur rcubq jvgu n ynpr bs oyhr, gung vg zvtug or nobir gur phevbhf
tveqyr bs gur rcubq, naq gung gur oernfgcyngr zvtug abg or ybbfrq sebz
gur rcubq; nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

39:22 Naq ur znqr gur ebor bs gur rcubq bs jbira jbex, nyy bs oyhr.

39:23 Naq gurer jnf na ubyr va gur zvqfg bs gur ebor, nf gur ubyr bs
na unoretrba, jvgu n onaq ebhaq nobhg gur ubyr, gung vg fubhyq abg
eraq.

39:24 Naq gurl znqr hcba gur urzf bs gur ebor cbzrtenangrf bs oyhr,
naq checyr, naq fpneyrg, naq gjvarq yvara.

39:25 Naq gurl znqr oryyf bs cher tbyq, naq chg gur oryyf orgjrra gur
cbzrtenangrf hcba gur urz bs gur ebor, ebhaq nobhg orgjrra gur
cbzrtenangrf; 39:26 N oryy naq n cbzrtenangr, n oryy naq n
cbzrtenangr, ebhaq nobhg gur urz bs gur ebor gb zvavfgre va; nf gur
YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

39:27 Naq gurl znqr pbngf bs svar yvara bs jbira jbex sbe Nneba, naq
sbe uvf fbaf, 39:28 Naq n zvger bs svar yvara, naq tbbqyl obaargf bs
svar yvara, naq yvara oerrpurf bs svar gjvarq yvara, 39:29 Naq n
tveqyr bs svar gjvarq yvara, naq oyhr, naq checyr, naq fpneyrg, bs
arrqyrjbex; nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

39:30 Naq gurl znqr gur cyngr bs gur ubyl pebja bs cher tbyq, naq
jebgr hcba vg n jevgvat, yvxr gb gur ratenivatf bs n fvtarg, UBYVARFF
GB GUR YBEQ.

39:31 Naq gurl gvrq hagb vg n ynpr bs oyhr, gb snfgra vg ba uvtu hcba
gur zvger; nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

39:32 Guhf jnf nyy gur jbex bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur grag bs gur
pbatertngvba svavfurq: naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq nppbeqvat gb nyy
gung gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf, fb qvq gurl.

39:33 Naq gurl oebhtug gur gnoreanpyr hagb Zbfrf, gur grag, naq nyy
uvf sheavgher, uvf gnpurf, uvf obneqf, uvf onef, naq uvf cvyynef, naq
uvf fbpxrgf, 39:34 Naq gur pbirevat bs enzf' fxvaf qlrq erq, naq gur
pbirevat bs onqtref' fxvaf, naq gur invy bs gur pbirevat, 39:35 Gur
nex bs gur grfgvzbal, naq gur fgnirf gurerbs, naq gur zrepl frng,
39:36 Gur gnoyr, naq nyy gur irffryf gurerbs, naq gur furjoernq, 39:37
Gur cher pnaqyrfgvpx, jvgu gur ynzcf gurerbs, rira jvgu gur ynzcf gb
or frg va beqre, naq nyy gur irffryf gurerbs, naq gur bvy sbe yvtug,
39:38 Naq gur tbyqra nygne, naq gur nabvagvat bvy, naq gur fjrrg
vaprafr, naq gur unatvat sbe gur gnoreanpyr qbbe, 39:39 Gur oenfra
nygne, naq uvf tengr bs oenff, uvf fgnirf, naq nyy uvf irffryf, gur
ynire naq uvf sbbg, 39:40 Gur unatvatf bs gur pbheg, uvf cvyynef, naq
uvf fbpxrgf, naq gur unatvat sbe gur pbheg tngr, uvf pbeqf, naq uvf
cvaf, naq nyy gur irffryf bs gur freivpr bs gur gnoreanpyr, sbe gur
grag bs gur pbatertngvba, 39:41 Gur pybguf bs freivpr gb qb freivpr va
gur ubyl cynpr, naq gur ubyl tnezragf sbe Nneba gur cevrfg, naq uvf
fbaf' tnezragf, gb zvavfgre va gur cevrfg'f bssvpr.

39:42 Nppbeqvat gb nyy gung gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf, fb gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry znqr nyy gur jbex.

39:43 Naq Zbfrf qvq ybbx hcba nyy gur jbex, naq, orubyq, gurl unq qbar
vg nf gur YBEQ unq pbzznaqrq, rira fb unq gurl qbar vg: naq Zbfrf
oyrffrq gurz.

40:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 40:2 Ba gur svefg qnl bs
gur svefg zbagu funyg gubh frg hc gur gnoreanpyr bs gur grag bs gur
pbatertngvba.

40:3 Naq gubh funyg chg gurerva gur nex bs gur grfgvzbal, naq pbire
gur nex jvgu gur invy.

40:4 Naq gubh funyg oevat va gur gnoyr, naq frg va beqre gur guvatf
gung ner gb or frg va beqre hcba vg; naq gubh funyg oevat va gur
pnaqyrfgvpx, naq yvtug gur ynzcf gurerbs.

40:5 Naq gubh funyg frg gur nygne bs tbyq sbe gur vaprafr orsber gur
nex bs gur grfgvzbal, naq chg gur unatvat bs gur qbbe gb gur
gnoreanpyr.

40:6 Naq gubh funyg frg gur nygne bs gur oheag bssrevat orsber gur
qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur grag bs gur pbatertngvba.

40:7 Naq gubh funyg frg gur ynire orgjrra gur grag bs gur pbatertngvba
naq gur nygne, naq funyg chg jngre gurerva.

40:8 Naq gubh funyg frg hc gur pbheg ebhaq nobhg, naq unat hc gur
unatvat ng gur pbheg tngr.

40:9 Naq gubh funyg gnxr gur nabvagvat bvy, naq nabvag gur gnoreanpyr,
naq nyy gung vf gurerva, naq funyg unyybj vg, naq nyy gur irffryf
gurerbs: naq vg funyy or ubyl.

40:10 Naq gubh funyg nabvag gur nygne bs gur oheag bssrevat, naq nyy
uvf irffryf, naq fnapgvsl gur nygne: naq vg funyy or na nygne zbfg
ubyl.

40:11 Naq gubh funyg nabvag gur ynire naq uvf sbbg, naq fnapgvsl vg.

40:12 Naq gubh funyg oevat Nneba naq uvf fbaf hagb gur qbbe bs gur
gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, naq jnfu gurz jvgu jngre.

40:13 Naq gubh funyg chg hcba Nneba gur ubyl tnezragf, naq nabvag uvz,
naq fnapgvsl uvz; gung ur znl zvavfgre hagb zr va gur cevrfg'f bssvpr.

40:14 Naq gubh funyg oevat uvf fbaf, naq pybgur gurz jvgu pbngf: 40:15
Naq gubh funyg nabvag gurz, nf gubh qvqfg nabvag gurve sngure, gung
gurl znl zvavfgre hagb zr va gur cevrfg'f bssvpr: sbe gurve nabvagvat
funyy fheryl or na rireynfgvat cevrfgubbq guebhtubhg gurve
trarengvbaf.

40:16 Guhf qvq Zbfrf: nppbeqvat gb nyy gung gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq uvz, fb
qvq ur.

40:17 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gur svefg zbagu va gur frpbaq lrne, ba
gur svefg qnl bs gur zbagu, gung gur gnoreanpyr jnf ernerq hc.

40:18 Naq Zbfrf ernerq hc gur gnoreanpyr, naq snfgrarq uvf fbpxrgf,
naq frg hc gur obneqf gurerbs, naq chg va gur onef gurerbs, naq ernerq
hc uvf cvyynef.

40:19 Naq ur fcernq noebnq gur grag bire gur gnoreanpyr, naq chg gur
pbirevat bs gur grag nobir hcba vg; nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

40:20 Naq ur gbbx naq chg gur grfgvzbal vagb gur nex, naq frg gur
fgnirf ba gur nex, naq chg gur zrepl frng nobir hcba gur nex: 40:21
Naq ur oebhtug gur nex vagb gur gnoreanpyr, naq frg hc gur invy bs gur
pbirevat, naq pbirerq gur nex bs gur grfgvzbal; nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq
Zbfrf.

40:22 Naq ur chg gur gnoyr va gur grag bs gur pbatertngvba, hcba gur
fvqr bs gur gnoreanpyr abegujneq, jvgubhg gur invy.

40:23 Naq ur frg gur oernq va beqre hcba vg orsber gur YBEQ; nf gur
YBEQ unq pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

40:24 Naq ur chg gur pnaqyrfgvpx va gur grag bs gur pbatertngvba, bire
ntnvafg gur gnoyr, ba gur fvqr bs gur gnoreanpyr fbhgujneq.

40:25 Naq ur yvtugrq gur ynzcf orsber gur YBEQ; nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq
Zbfrf.

40:26 Naq ur chg gur tbyqra nygne va gur grag bs gur pbatertngvba
orsber gur invy: 40:27 Naq ur oheag fjrrg vaprafr gurerba; nf gur YBEQ
pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

40:28 Naq ur frg hc gur unatvat ng gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr.

40:29 Naq ur chg gur nygne bs oheag bssrevat ol gur qbbe bs gur
gnoreanpyr bs gur grag bs gur pbatertngvba, naq bssrerq hcba vg gur
oheag bssrevat naq gur zrng bssrevat; nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

40:30 Naq ur frg gur ynire orgjrra gur grag bs gur pbatertngvba naq
gur nygne, naq chg jngre gurer, gb jnfu jvguny.

40:31 Naq Zbfrf naq Nneba naq uvf fbaf jnfurq gurve unaqf naq gurve
srrg gurerng: 40:32 Jura gurl jrag vagb gur grag bs gur pbatertngvba,
naq jura gurl pnzr arne hagb gur nygne, gurl jnfurq; nf gur YBEQ
pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

40:33 Naq ur ernerq hc gur pbheg ebhaq nobhg gur gnoreanpyr naq gur
nygne, naq frg hc gur unatvat bs gur pbheg tngr. Fb Zbfrf svavfurq gur
jbex.

40:34 Gura n pybhq pbirerq gur grag bs gur pbatertngvba, naq gur tybel
bs gur YBEQ svyyrq gur gnoreanpyr.

40:35 Naq Zbfrf jnf abg noyr gb ragre vagb gur grag bs gur
pbatertngvba, orpnhfr gur pybhq nobqr gurerba, naq gur tybel bs gur
YBEQ svyyrq gur gnoreanpyr.

40:36 Naq jura gur pybhq jnf gnxra hc sebz bire gur gnoreanpyr, gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry jrag bajneq va nyy gurve wbhearlf: 40:37 Ohg vs gur
pybhq jrer abg gnxra hc, gura gurl wbhearlrq abg gvyy gur qnl gung vg
jnf gnxra hc.

40:38 Sbe gur pybhq bs gur YBEQ jnf hcba gur gnoreanpyr ol qnl, naq
sver jnf ba vg ol avtug, va gur fvtug bs nyy gur ubhfr bs Vfenry,
guebhtubhg nyy gurve wbhearlf.




Gur Guveq Obbx bs Zbfrf:  Pnyyrq Yrivgvphf


1:1 Naq gur YBEQ pnyyrq hagb Zbfrf, naq fcnxr hagb uvz bhg bs gur
gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, fnlvat, 1:2 Fcrnx hagb gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, naq fnl hagb gurz, Vs nal zna bs lbh oevat na bssrevat hagb
gur YBEQ, lr funyy oevat lbhe bssrevat bs gur pnggyr, rira bs gur
ureq, naq bs gur sybpx.

1:3 Vs uvf bssrevat or n oheag fnpevsvpr bs gur ureq, yrg uvz bssre n
znyr jvgubhg oyrzvfu: ur funyy bssre vg bs uvf bja ibyhagnel jvyy ng
gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba orsber gur YBEQ.

1:4 Naq ur funyy chg uvf unaq hcba gur urnq bs gur oheag bssrevat; naq
vg funyy or npprcgrq sbe uvz gb znxr ngbarzrag sbe uvz.

1:5 Naq ur funyy xvyy gur ohyybpx orsber gur YBEQ: naq gur cevrfgf,
Nneba'f fbaf, funyy oevat gur oybbq, naq fcevaxyr gur oybbq ebhaq
nobhg hcba gur nygne gung vf ol gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba.

1:6 Naq ur funyy synl gur oheag bssrevat, naq phg vg vagb uvf cvrprf.

1:7 Naq gur fbaf bs Nneba gur cevrfg funyy chg sver hcba gur nygne,
naq ynl gur jbbq va beqre hcba gur sver: 1:8 Naq gur cevrfgf, Nneba'f
fbaf, funyy ynl gur cnegf, gur urnq, naq gur sng, va beqre hcba gur
jbbq gung vf ba gur sver juvpu vf hcba gur nygne: 1:9 Ohg uvf vajneqf
naq uvf yrtf funyy ur jnfu va jngre: naq gur cevrfg funyy ohea nyy ba
gur nygne, gb or n oheag fnpevsvpr, na bssrevat znqr ol sver, bs n
fjrrg fnibhe hagb gur YBEQ.

1:10 Naq vs uvf bssrevat or bs gur sybpxf, anzryl, bs gur furrc, be bs
gur tbngf, sbe n oheag fnpevsvpr; ur funyy oevat vg n znyr jvgubhg
oyrzvfu.

1:11 Naq ur funyy xvyy vg ba gur fvqr bs gur nygne abegujneq orsber
gur YBEQ: naq gur cevrfgf, Nneba'f fbaf, funyy fcevaxyr uvf oybbq
ebhaq nobhg hcba gur nygne.

1:12 Naq ur funyy phg vg vagb uvf cvrprf, jvgu uvf urnq naq uvf sng:
naq gur cevrfg funyy ynl gurz va beqre ba gur jbbq gung vf ba gur sver
juvpu vf hcba gur nygne: 1:13 Ohg ur funyy jnfu gur vajneqf naq gur
yrtf jvgu jngre: naq gur cevrfg funyy oevat vg nyy, naq ohea vg hcba
gur nygne: vg vf n oheag fnpevsvpr, na bssrevat znqr ol sver, bs n
fjrrg fnibhe hagb gur YBEQ.

1:14 Naq vs gur oheag fnpevsvpr sbe uvf bssrevat gb gur YBEQ or bs
sbjyf, gura ur funyy oevat uvf bssrevat bs ghegyrqbirf, be bs lbhat
cvtrbaf.

1:15 Naq gur cevrfg funyy oevat vg hagb gur nygne, naq jevat bss uvf
urnq, naq ohea vg ba gur nygne; naq gur oybbq gurerbs funyy or jehat
bhg ng gur fvqr bs gur nygne: 1:16 Naq ur funyy cyhpx njnl uvf pebc
jvgu uvf srnguref, naq pnfg vg orfvqr gur nygne ba gur rnfg cneg, ol
gur cynpr bs gur nfurf: 1:17 Naq ur funyy pyrnir vg jvgu gur jvatf
gurerbs, ohg funyy abg qvivqr vg nfhaqre: naq gur cevrfg funyy ohea vg
hcba gur nygne, hcba gur jbbq gung vf hcba gur sver: vg vf n oheag
fnpevsvpr, na bssrevat znqr ol sver, bs n fjrrg fnibhe hagb gur YBEQ.

2:1 Naq jura nal jvyy bssre n zrng bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ, uvf
bssrevat funyy or bs svar sybhe; naq ur funyy cbhe bvy hcba vg, naq
chg senaxvaprafr gurerba: 2:2 Naq ur funyy oevat vg gb Nneba'f fbaf
gur cevrfgf: naq ur funyy gnxr gurerbhg uvf unaqshy bs gur sybhe
gurerbs, naq bs gur bvy gurerbs, jvgu nyy gur senaxvaprafr gurerbs;
naq gur cevrfg funyy ohea gur zrzbevny bs vg hcba gur nygne, gb or na
bssrevat znqr ol sver, bs n fjrrg fnibhe hagb gur YBEQ: 2:3 Naq gur
erzanag bs gur zrng bssrevat funyy or Nneba'f naq uvf fbaf': vg vf n
guvat zbfg ubyl bs gur bssrevatf bs gur YBEQ znqr ol sver.

2:4 Naq vs gubh oevat na boyngvba bs n zrng bssrevat onxra va gur
bira, vg funyy or hayrnirarq pnxrf bs svar sybhe zvatyrq jvgu bvy, be
hayrnirarq jnsref nabvagrq jvgu bvy.

2:5 Naq vs gul boyngvba or n zrng bssrevat onxra va n cna, vg funyy or
bs svar sybhe hayrnirarq, zvatyrq jvgu bvy.

2:6 Gubh funyg cneg vg va cvrprf, naq cbhe bvy gurerba: vg vf n zrng
bssrevat.

2:7 Naq vs gul boyngvba or n zrng bssrevat onxra va gur selvatcna, vg
funyy or znqr bs svar sybhe jvgu bvy.

2:8 Naq gubh funyg oevat gur zrng bssrevat gung vf znqr bs gurfr
guvatf hagb gur YBEQ: naq jura vg vf cerfragrq hagb gur cevrfg, ur
funyy oevat vg hagb gur nygne.

2:9 Naq gur cevrfg funyy gnxr sebz gur zrng bssrevat n zrzbevny
gurerbs, naq funyy ohea vg hcba gur nygne: vg vf na bssrevat znqr ol
sver, bs n fjrrg fnibhe hagb gur YBEQ.

2:10 Naq gung juvpu vf yrsg bs gur zrng bssrevat funyy or Nneba'f naq
uvf fbaf': vg vf n guvat zbfg ubyl bs gur bssrevatf bs gur YBEQ znqr
ol sver.

2:11 Ab zrng bssrevat, juvpu lr funyy oevat hagb gur YBEQ, funyy or
znqr jvgu yrnira: sbe lr funyy ohea ab yrnira, abe nal ubarl, va nal
bssrevat bs gur YBEQ znqr ol sver.

2:12 Nf sbe gur boyngvba bs gur svefgsehvgf, lr funyy bssre gurz hagb
gur YBEQ: ohg gurl funyy abg or oheag ba gur nygne sbe n fjrrg fnibhe.

2:13 Naq rirel boyngvba bs gul zrng bssrevat funyg gubh frnfba jvgu
fnyg; arvgure funyg gubh fhssre gur fnyg bs gur pbiranag bs gul Tbq gb
or ynpxvat sebz gul zrng bssrevat: jvgu nyy guvar bssrevatf gubh funyg
bssre fnyg.

2:14 Naq vs gubh bssre n zrng bssrevat bs gul svefgsehvgf hagb gur
YBEQ, gubh funyg bssre sbe gur zrng bssrevat bs gul svefgsehvgf terra
rnef bs pbea qevrq ol gur sver, rira pbea orngra bhg bs shyy rnef.

2:15 Naq gubh funyg chg bvy hcba vg, naq ynl senaxvaprafr gurerba: vg
vf n zrng bssrevat.

2:16 Naq gur cevrfg funyy ohea gur zrzbevny bs vg, cneg bs gur orngra
pbea gurerbs, naq cneg bs gur bvy gurerbs, jvgu nyy gur senaxvaprafr
gurerbs: vg vf na bssrevat znqr ol sver hagb gur YBEQ.

3:1 Naq vs uvf boyngvba or n fnpevsvpr bs crnpr bssrevat, vs ur bssre
vg bs gur ureq; jurgure vg or n znyr be srznyr, ur funyy bssre vg
jvgubhg oyrzvfu orsber gur YBEQ.

3:2 Naq ur funyy ynl uvf unaq hcba gur urnq bs uvf bssrevat, naq xvyy
vg ng gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba: naq Nneba'f fbaf
gur cevrfgf funyy fcevaxyr gur oybbq hcba gur nygne ebhaq nobhg.

3:3 Naq ur funyy bssre bs gur fnpevsvpr bs gur crnpr bssrevat na
bssrevat znqr ol sver hagb gur YBEQ; gur sng gung pbirergu gur
vajneqf, naq nyy gur sng gung vf hcba gur vajneqf, 3:4 Naq gur gjb
xvqarlf, naq gur sng gung vf ba gurz, juvpu vf ol gur synaxf, naq gur
pnhy nobir gur yvire, jvgu gur xvqarlf, vg funyy ur gnxr njnl.

3:5 Naq Nneba'f fbaf funyy ohea vg ba gur nygne hcba gur oheag
fnpevsvpr, juvpu vf hcba gur jbbq gung vf ba gur sver: vg vf na
bssrevat znqr ol sver, bs n fjrrg fnibhe hagb gur YBEQ.

3:6 Naq vs uvf bssrevat sbe n fnpevsvpr bs crnpr bssrevat hagb gur
YBEQ or bs gur sybpx; znyr be srznyr, ur funyy bssre vg jvgubhg
oyrzvfu.

3:7 Vs ur bssre n ynzo sbe uvf bssrevat, gura funyy ur bssre vg orsber
gur YBEQ.

3:8 Naq ur funyy ynl uvf unaq hcba gur urnq bs uvf bssrevat, naq xvyy
vg orsber gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba: naq Nneba'f fbaf funyy
fcevaxyr gur oybbq gurerbs ebhaq nobhg hcba gur nygne.

3:9 Naq ur funyy bssre bs gur fnpevsvpr bs gur crnpr bssrevat na
bssrevat znqr ol sver hagb gur YBEQ; gur sng gurerbs, naq gur jubyr
ehzc, vg funyy ur gnxr bss uneq ol gur onpxobar; naq gur sng gung
pbirergu gur vajneqf, naq nyy gur sng gung vf hcba gur vajneqf, 3:10
Naq gur gjb xvqarlf, naq gur sng gung vf hcba gurz, juvpu vf ol gur
synaxf, naq gur pnhy nobir gur yvire, jvgu gur xvqarlf, vg funyy ur
gnxr njnl.

3:11 Naq gur cevrfg funyy ohea vg hcba gur nygne: vg vf gur sbbq bs
gur bssrevat znqr ol sver hagb gur YBEQ.

3:12 Naq vs uvf bssrevat or n tbng, gura ur funyy bssre vg orsber gur
YBEQ.

3:13 Naq ur funyy ynl uvf unaq hcba gur urnq bs vg, naq xvyy vg orsber
gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba: naq gur fbaf bs Nneba funyy
fcevaxyr gur oybbq gurerbs hcba gur nygne ebhaq nobhg.

3:14 Naq ur funyy bssre gurerbs uvf bssrevat, rira na bssrevat znqr ol
sver hagb gur YBEQ; gur sng gung pbirergu gur vajneqf, naq nyy gur sng
gung vf hcba gur vajneqf, 3:15 Naq gur gjb xvqarlf, naq gur sng gung
vf hcba gurz, juvpu vf ol gur synaxf, naq gur pnhy nobir gur yvire,
jvgu gur xvqarlf, vg funyy ur gnxr njnl.

3:16 Naq gur cevrfg funyy ohea gurz hcba gur nygne: vg vf gur sbbq bs
gur bssrevat znqr ol sver sbe n fjrrg fnibhe: nyy gur sng vf gur
YBEQ'f.

3:17 Vg funyy or n crecrghny fgnghgr sbe lbhe trarengvbaf guebhtubhg
nyy lbhe qjryyvatf, gung lr rng arvgure sng abe oybbq.

4:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 4:2 Fcrnx hagb gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Vs n fbhy funyy fva guebhtu vtabenapr ntnvafg nal
bs gur pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ pbapreavat guvatf juvpu bhtug abg gb
or qbar, naq funyy qb ntnvafg nal bs gurz: 4:3 Vs gur cevrfg gung vf
nabvagrq qb fva nppbeqvat gb gur fva bs gur crbcyr; gura yrg uvz oevat
sbe uvf fva, juvpu ur ungu fvaarq, n lbhat ohyybpx jvgubhg oyrzvfu
hagb gur YBEQ sbe n fva bssrevat.

4:4 Naq ur funyy oevat gur ohyybpx hagb gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs
gur pbatertngvba orsber gur YBEQ; naq funyy ynl uvf unaq hcba gur
ohyybpx'f urnq, naq xvyy gur ohyybpx orsber gur YBEQ.

4:5 Naq gur cevrfg gung vf nabvagrq funyy gnxr bs gur ohyybpx'f oybbq,
naq oevat vg gb gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba: 4:6 Naq gur cevrfg
funyy qvc uvf svatre va gur oybbq, naq fcevaxyr bs gur oybbq frira
gvzrf orsber gur YBEQ, orsber gur invy bs gur fnapghnel.

4:7 Naq gur cevrfg funyy chg fbzr bs gur oybbq hcba gur ubeaf bs gur
nygne bs fjrrg vaprafr orsber gur YBEQ, juvpu vf va gur gnoreanpyr bs
gur pbatertngvba; naq funyy cbhe nyy gur oybbq bs gur ohyybpx ng gur
obggbz bs gur nygne bs gur oheag bssrevat, juvpu vf ng gur qbbe bs gur
gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba.

4:8 Naq ur funyy gnxr bss sebz vg nyy gur sng bs gur ohyybpx sbe gur
fva bssrevat; gur sng gung pbirergu gur vajneqf, naq nyy gur sng gung
vf hcba gur vajneqf, 4:9 Naq gur gjb xvqarlf, naq gur sng gung vf hcba
gurz, juvpu vf ol gur synaxf, naq gur pnhy nobir gur yvire, jvgu gur
xvqarlf, vg funyy ur gnxr njnl, 4:10 Nf vg jnf gnxra bss sebz gur
ohyybpx bs gur fnpevsvpr bs crnpr bssrevatf: naq gur cevrfg funyy ohea
gurz hcba gur nygne bs gur oheag bssrevat.

4:11 Naq gur fxva bs gur ohyybpx, naq nyy uvf syrfu, jvgu uvf urnq,
naq jvgu uvf yrtf, naq uvf vajneqf, naq uvf qhat, 4:12 Rira gur jubyr
ohyybpx funyy ur pneel sbegu jvgubhg gur pnzc hagb n pyrna cynpr,
jurer gur nfurf ner cbherq bhg, naq ohea uvz ba gur jbbq jvgu sver:
jurer gur nfurf ner cbherq bhg funyy ur or oheag.

4:13 Naq vs gur jubyr pbatertngvba bs Vfenry fva guebhtu vtabenapr,
naq gur guvat or uvq sebz gur rlrf bs gur nffrzoyl, naq gurl unir qbar
fbzrjung ntnvafg nal bs gur pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ pbapreavat guvatf
juvpu fubhyq abg or qbar, naq ner thvygl; 4:14 Jura gur fva, juvpu
gurl unir fvaarq ntnvafg vg, vf xabja, gura gur pbatertngvba funyy
bssre n lbhat ohyybpx sbe gur fva, naq oevat uvz orsber gur gnoreanpyr
bs gur pbatertngvba.

4:15 Naq gur ryqref bs gur pbatertngvba funyy ynl gurve unaqf hcba gur
urnq bs gur ohyybpx orsber gur YBEQ: naq gur ohyybpx funyy or xvyyrq
orsber gur YBEQ.

4:16 Naq gur cevrfg gung vf nabvagrq funyy oevat bs gur ohyybpx'f
oybbq gb gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba: 4:17 Naq gur cevrfg funyy
qvc uvf svatre va fbzr bs gur oybbq, naq fcevaxyr vg frira gvzrf
orsber gur YBEQ, rira orsber gur invy.

4:18 Naq ur funyy chg fbzr bs gur oybbq hcba gur ubeaf bs gur nygne
juvpu vf orsber gur YBEQ, gung vf va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba, naq funyy cbhe bhg nyy gur oybbq ng gur obggbz bs gur
nygne bs gur oheag bssrevat, juvpu vf ng gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs
gur pbatertngvba.

4:19 Naq ur funyy gnxr nyy uvf sng sebz uvz, naq ohea vg hcba gur
nygne.

4:20 Naq ur funyy qb jvgu gur ohyybpx nf ur qvq jvgu gur ohyybpx sbe n
fva bssrevat, fb funyy ur qb jvgu guvf: naq gur cevrfg funyy znxr na
ngbarzrag sbe gurz, naq vg funyy or sbetvira gurz.

4:21 Naq ur funyy pneel sbegu gur ohyybpx jvgubhg gur pnzc, naq ohea
uvz nf ur ohearq gur svefg ohyybpx: vg vf n fva bssrevat sbe gur
pbatertngvba.

4:22 Jura n ehyre ungu fvaarq, naq qbar fbzrjung guebhtu vtabenapr
ntnvafg nal bs gur pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ uvf Tbq pbapreavat guvatf
juvpu fubhyq abg or qbar, naq vf thvygl; 4:23 Be vs uvf fva, jurerva
ur ungu fvaarq, pbzr gb uvf xabjyrqtr; ur funyy oevat uvf bssrevat, n
xvq bs gur tbngf, n znyr jvgubhg oyrzvfu: 4:24 Naq ur funyy ynl uvf
unaq hcba gur urnq bs gur tbng, naq xvyy vg va gur cynpr jurer gurl
xvyy gur oheag bssrevat orsber gur YBEQ: vg vf n fva bssrevat.

4:25 Naq gur cevrfg funyy gnxr bs gur oybbq bs gur fva bssrevat jvgu
uvf svatre, naq chg vg hcba gur ubeaf bs gur nygne bs oheag bssrevat,
naq funyy cbhe bhg uvf oybbq ng gur obggbz bs gur nygne bs oheag
bssrevat.

4:26 Naq ur funyy ohea nyy uvf sng hcba gur nygne, nf gur sng bs gur
fnpevsvpr bs crnpr bssrevatf: naq gur cevrfg funyy znxr na ngbarzrag
sbe uvz nf pbapreavat uvf fva, naq vg funyy or sbetvira uvz.

4:27 Naq vs nal bar bs gur pbzzba crbcyr fva guebhtu vtabenapr, juvyr
ur qbrgu fbzrjung ntnvafg nal bs gur pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ
pbapreavat guvatf juvpu bhtug abg gb or qbar, naq or thvygl; 4:28 Be
vs uvf fva, juvpu ur ungu fvaarq, pbzr gb uvf xabjyrqtr: gura ur funyy
oevat uvf bssrevat, n xvq bs gur tbngf, n srznyr jvgubhg oyrzvfu, sbe
uvf fva juvpu ur ungu fvaarq.

4:29 Naq ur funyy ynl uvf unaq hcba gur urnq bs gur fva bssrevat, naq
fynl gur fva bssrevat va gur cynpr bs gur oheag bssrevat.

4:30 Naq gur cevrfg funyy gnxr bs gur oybbq gurerbs jvgu uvf svatre,
naq chg vg hcba gur ubeaf bs gur nygne bs oheag bssrevat, naq funyy
cbhe bhg nyy gur oybbq gurerbs ng gur obggbz bs gur nygne.

4:31 Naq ur funyy gnxr njnl nyy gur sng gurerbs, nf gur sng vf gnxra
njnl sebz bss gur fnpevsvpr bs crnpr bssrevatf; naq gur cevrfg funyy
ohea vg hcba gur nygne sbe n fjrrg fnibhe hagb gur YBEQ; naq gur
cevrfg funyy znxr na ngbarzrag sbe uvz, naq vg funyy or sbetvira uvz.

4:32 Naq vs ur oevat n ynzo sbe n fva bssrevat, ur funyy oevat vg n
srznyr jvgubhg oyrzvfu.

4:33 Naq ur funyy ynl uvf unaq hcba gur urnq bs gur fva bssrevat, naq
fynl vg sbe n fva bssrevat va gur cynpr jurer gurl xvyy gur oheag
bssrevat.

4:34 Naq gur cevrfg funyy gnxr bs gur oybbq bs gur fva bssrevat jvgu
uvf svatre, naq chg vg hcba gur ubeaf bs gur nygne bs oheag bssrevat,
naq funyy cbhe bhg nyy gur oybbq gurerbs ng gur obggbz bs gur nygne:
4:35 Naq ur funyy gnxr njnl nyy gur sng gurerbs, nf gur sng bs gur
ynzo vf gnxra njnl sebz gur fnpevsvpr bs gur crnpr bssrevatf; naq gur
cevrfg funyy ohea gurz hcba gur nygne, nppbeqvat gb gur bssrevatf znqr
ol sver hagb gur YBEQ: naq gur cevrfg funyy znxr na ngbarzrag sbe uvf
fva gung ur ungu pbzzvggrq, naq vg funyy or sbetvira uvz.

5:1 Naq vs n fbhy fva, naq urne gur ibvpr bs fjrnevat, naq vf n
jvgarff, jurgure ur ungu frra be xabja bs vg; vs ur qb abg hggre vg,
gura ur funyy orne uvf vavdhvgl.

5:2 Be vs n fbhy gbhpu nal hapyrna guvat, jurgure vg or n pnepnfr bs
na hapyrna ornfg, be n pnepnfr bs hapyrna pnggyr, be gur pnepnfr bs
hapyrna perrcvat guvatf, naq vs vg or uvqqra sebz uvz; ur nyfb funyy
or hapyrna, naq thvygl.

5:3 Be vs ur gbhpu gur hapyrnaarff bs zna, jungfbrire hapyrnaarff vg
or gung n zna funyy or qrsvyrq jvguny, naq vg or uvq sebz uvz; jura ur
xabjrgu bs vg, gura ur funyy or thvygl.

5:4 Be vs n fbhy fjrne, cebabhapvat jvgu uvf yvcf gb qb rivy, be gb qb
tbbq, jungfbrire vg or gung n zna funyy cebabhapr jvgu na bngu, naq vg
or uvq sebz uvz; jura ur xabjrgu bs vg, gura ur funyy or thvygl va bar
bs gurfr.

5:5 Naq vg funyy or, jura ur funyy or thvygl va bar bs gurfr guvatf,
gung ur funyy pbasrff gung ur ungu fvaarq va gung guvat: 5:6 Naq ur
funyy oevat uvf gerfcnff bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ sbe uvf fva juvpu ur
ungu fvaarq, n srznyr sebz gur sybpx, n ynzo be n xvq bs gur tbngf,
sbe n fva bssrevat; naq gur cevrfg funyy znxr na ngbarzrag sbe uvz
pbapreavat uvf fva.

5:7 Naq vs ur or abg noyr gb oevat n ynzo, gura ur funyy oevat sbe uvf
gerfcnff, juvpu ur ungu pbzzvggrq, gjb ghegyrqbirf, be gjb lbhat
cvtrbaf, hagb gur YBEQ; bar sbe n fva bssrevat, naq gur bgure sbe n
oheag bssrevat.

5:8 Naq ur funyy oevat gurz hagb gur cevrfg, jub funyy bssre gung
juvpu vf sbe gur fva bssrevat svefg, naq jevat bss uvf urnq sebz uvf
arpx, ohg funyy abg qvivqr vg nfhaqre: 5:9 Naq ur funyy fcevaxyr bs
gur oybbq bs gur fva bssrevat hcba gur fvqr bs gur nygne; naq gur erfg
bs gur oybbq funyy or jehat bhg ng gur obggbz bs gur nygne: vg vf n
fva bssrevat.

5:10 Naq ur funyy bssre gur frpbaq sbe n oheag bssrevat, nppbeqvat gb
gur znaare: naq gur cevrfg funyy znxr na ngbarzrag sbe uvz sbe uvf fva
juvpu ur ungu fvaarq, naq vg funyy or sbetvira uvz.

5:11 Ohg vs ur or abg noyr gb oevat gjb ghegyrqbirf, be gjb lbhat
cvtrbaf, gura ur gung fvaarq funyy oevat sbe uvf bssrevat gur gragu
cneg bs na rcunu bs svar sybhe sbe n fva bssrevat; ur funyy chg ab bvy
hcba vg, arvgure funyy ur chg nal senaxvaprafr gurerba: sbe vg vf n
fva bssrevat.

5:12 Gura funyy ur oevat vg gb gur cevrfg, naq gur cevrfg funyy gnxr
uvf unaqshy bs vg, rira n zrzbevny gurerbs, naq ohea vg ba gur nygne,
nppbeqvat gb gur bssrevatf znqr ol sver hagb gur YBEQ: vg vf n fva
bssrevat.

5:13 Naq gur cevrfg funyy znxr na ngbarzrag sbe uvz nf gbhpuvat uvf
fva gung ur ungu fvaarq va bar bs gurfr, naq vg funyy or sbetvira uvz:
naq gur erzanag funyy or gur cevrfg'f, nf n zrng bssrevat.

5:14 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 5:15 Vs n fbhy pbzzvg n
gerfcnff, naq fva guebhtu vtabenapr, va gur ubyl guvatf bs gur YBEQ;
gura ur funyy oevat sbe uvf gerfcnff hagb gur YBEQ n enz jvgubhg
oyrzvfu bhg bs gur sybpxf, jvgu gul rfgvzngvba ol furxryf bs fvyire,
nsgre gur furxry bs gur fnapghnel, sbe n gerfcnff bssrevat.

5:16 Naq ur funyy znxr nzraqf sbe gur unez gung ur ungu qbar va gur
ubyl guvat, naq funyy nqq gur svsgu cneg gurergb, naq tvir vg hagb gur
cevrfg: naq gur cevrfg funyy znxr na ngbarzrag sbe uvz jvgu gur enz bs
gur gerfcnff bssrevat, naq vg funyy or sbetvira uvz.

5:17 Naq vs n fbhy fva, naq pbzzvg nal bs gurfr guvatf juvpu ner
sbeovqqra gb or qbar ol gur pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ; gubhtu ur jvfg
vg abg, lrg vf ur thvygl, naq funyy orne uvf vavdhvgl.

5:18 Naq ur funyy oevat n enz jvgubhg oyrzvfu bhg bs gur sybpx, jvgu
gul rfgvzngvba, sbe n gerfcnff bssrevat, hagb gur cevrfg: naq gur
cevrfg funyy znxr na ngbarzrag sbe uvz pbapreavat uvf vtabenapr
jurerva ur reerq naq jvfg vg abg, naq vg funyy or sbetvira uvz.

5:19 Vg vf n gerfcnff bssrevat: ur ungu pregnvayl gerfcnffrq ntnvafg
gur YBEQ.

6:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 6:2 Vs n fbhy fva, naq
pbzzvg n gerfcnff ntnvafg gur YBEQ, naq yvr hagb uvf arvtuobhe va gung
juvpu jnf qryvirerq uvz gb xrrc, be va sryybjfuvc, be va n guvat gnxra
njnl ol ivbyrapr, be ungu qrprvirq uvf arvtuobhe; 6:3 Be unir sbhaq
gung juvpu jnf ybfg, naq yvrgu pbapreavat vg, naq fjrnergu snyfryl; va
nal bs nyy gurfr gung n zna qbrgu, fvaavat gurerva: 6:4 Gura vg funyy
or, orpnhfr ur ungu fvaarq, naq vf thvygl, gung ur funyy erfgber gung
juvpu ur gbbx ivbyragyl njnl, be gur guvat juvpu ur ungu qrprvgshyyl
tbggra, be gung juvpu jnf qryvirerq uvz gb xrrc, be gur ybfg guvat
juvpu ur sbhaq, 6:5 Be nyy gung nobhg juvpu ur ungu fjbea snyfryl; ur
funyy rira erfgber vg va gur cevapvcny, naq funyy nqq gur svsgu cneg
zber gurergb, naq tvir vg hagb uvz gb jubz vg nccregnvargu, va gur qnl
bs uvf gerfcnff bssrevat.

6:6 Naq ur funyy oevat uvf gerfcnff bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ, n enz
jvgubhg oyrzvfu bhg bs gur sybpx, jvgu gul rfgvzngvba, sbe n gerfcnff
bssrevat, hagb gur cevrfg: 6:7 Naq gur cevrfg funyy znxr na ngbarzrag
sbe uvz orsber gur YBEQ: naq vg funyy or sbetvira uvz sbe nal guvat bs
nyy gung ur ungu qbar va gerfcnffvat gurerva.

6:8 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 6:9 Pbzznaq Nneba naq uvf
fbaf, fnlvat, Guvf vf gur ynj bs gur oheag bssrevat: Vg vf gur oheag
bssrevat, orpnhfr bs gur oheavat hcba gur nygne nyy avtug hagb gur
zbeavat, naq gur sver bs gur nygne funyy or oheavat va vg.

6:10 Naq gur cevrfg funyy chg ba uvf yvara tnezrag, naq uvf yvara
oerrpurf funyy ur chg hcba uvf syrfu, naq gnxr hc gur nfurf juvpu gur
sver ungu pbafhzrq jvgu gur oheag bssrevat ba gur nygne, naq ur funyy
chg gurz orfvqr gur nygne.

6:11 Naq ur funyy chg bss uvf tnezragf, naq chg ba bgure tnezragf, naq
pneel sbegu gur nfurf jvgubhg gur pnzc hagb n pyrna cynpr.

6:12 Naq gur sver hcba gur nygne funyy or oheavat va vg; vg funyy abg
or chg bhg: naq gur cevrfg funyy ohea jbbq ba vg rirel zbeavat, naq
ynl gur oheag bssrevat va beqre hcba vg; naq ur funyy ohea gurerba gur
sng bs gur crnpr bssrevatf.

6:13 Gur sver funyy rire or oheavat hcba gur nygne; vg funyy arire tb
bhg.

6:14 Naq guvf vf gur ynj bs gur zrng bssrevat: gur fbaf bs Nneba funyy
bssre vg orsber gur YBEQ, orsber gur nygne.

6:15 Naq ur funyy gnxr bs vg uvf unaqshy, bs gur sybhe bs gur zrng
bssrevat, naq bs gur bvy gurerbs, naq nyy gur senaxvaprafr juvpu vf
hcba gur zrng bssrevat, naq funyy ohea vg hcba gur nygne sbe n fjrrg
fnibhe, rira gur zrzbevny bs vg, hagb gur YBEQ.

6:16 Naq gur erznvaqre gurerbs funyy Nneba naq uvf fbaf rng: jvgu
hayrnirarq oernq funyy vg or rngra va gur ubyl cynpr; va gur pbheg bs
gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba gurl funyy rng vg.

6:17 Vg funyy abg or onxra jvgu yrnira. V unir tvira vg hagb gurz sbe
gurve cbegvba bs zl bssrevatf znqr ol sver; vg vf zbfg ubyl, nf vf gur
fva bssrevat, naq nf gur gerfcnff bssrevat.

6:18 Nyy gur znyrf nzbat gur puvyqera bs Nneba funyy rng bs vg. Vg
funyy or n fgnghgr sbe rire va lbhe trarengvbaf pbapreavat gur
bssrevatf bs gur YBEQ znqr ol sver: rirel bar gung gbhpurgu gurz funyy
or ubyl.

6:19 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 6:20 Guvf vf gur bssrevat
bs Nneba naq bs uvf fbaf, juvpu gurl funyy bssre hagb gur YBEQ va gur
qnl jura ur vf nabvagrq; gur gragu cneg bs na rcunu bs svar sybhe sbe
n zrng bssrevat crecrghny, unys bs vg va gur zbeavat, naq unys gurerbs
ng avtug.

6:21 Va n cna vg funyy or znqr jvgu bvy; naq jura vg vf onxra, gubh
funyg oevat vg va: naq gur onxra cvrprf bs gur zrng bssrevat funyg
gubh bssre sbe n fjrrg fnibhe hagb gur YBEQ.

6:22 Naq gur cevrfg bs uvf fbaf gung vf nabvagrq va uvf fgrnq funyy
bssre vg: vg vf n fgnghgr sbe rire hagb gur YBEQ; vg funyy or jubyyl
oheag.

6:23 Sbe rirel zrng bssrevat sbe gur cevrfg funyy or jubyyl oheag: vg
funyy abg or rngra.

6:24 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 6:25 Fcrnx hagb Nneba naq
gb uvf fbaf, fnlvat, Guvf vf gur ynj bs gur fva bssrevat: Va gur cynpr
jurer gur oheag bssrevat vf xvyyrq funyy gur fva bssrevat or xvyyrq
orsber gur YBEQ: vg vf zbfg ubyl.

6:26 Gur cevrfg gung bssrergu vg sbe fva funyy rng vg: va gur ubyl
cynpr funyy vg or rngra, va gur pbheg bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba.

6:27 Jungfbrire funyy gbhpu gur syrfu gurerbs funyy or ubyl: naq jura
gurer vf fcevaxyrq bs gur oybbq gurerbs hcba nal tnezrag, gubh funyg
jnfu gung jurerba vg jnf fcevaxyrq va gur ubyl cynpr.

6:28 Ohg gur rnegura irffry jurerva vg vf fbqqra funyy or oebxra: naq
vs vg or fbqqra va n oenfra cbg, vg funyy or obgu fpbherq, naq evafrq
va jngre.

6:29 Nyy gur znyrf nzbat gur cevrfgf funyy rng gurerbs: vg vf zbfg
ubyl.

6:30 Naq ab fva bssrevat, jurerbs nal bs gur oybbq vf oebhtug vagb gur
gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba gb erpbapvyr jvguny va gur ubyl cynpr,
funyy or rngra: vg funyy or oheag va gur sver.

7:1 Yvxrjvfr guvf vf gur ynj bs gur gerfcnff bssrevat: vg vf zbfg
ubyl.

7:2 Va gur cynpr jurer gurl xvyy gur oheag bssrevat funyy gurl xvyy
gur gerfcnff bssrevat: naq gur oybbq gurerbs funyy ur fcevaxyr ebhaq
nobhg hcba gur nygne.

7:3 Naq ur funyy bssre bs vg nyy gur sng gurerbs; gur ehzc, naq gur
sng gung pbirergu gur vajneqf, 7:4 Naq gur gjb xvqarlf, naq gur sng
gung vf ba gurz, juvpu vf ol gur synaxf, naq gur pnhy gung vf nobir
gur yvire, jvgu gur xvqarlf, vg funyy ur gnxr njnl: 7:5 Naq gur cevrfg
funyy ohea gurz hcba gur nygne sbe na bssrevat znqr ol sver hagb gur
YBEQ: vg vf n gerfcnff bssrevat.

7:6 Rirel znyr nzbat gur cevrfgf funyy rng gurerbs: vg funyy or rngra
va gur ubyl cynpr: vg vf zbfg ubyl.

7:7 Nf gur fva bssrevat vf, fb vf gur gerfcnff bssrevat: gurer vf bar
ynj sbe gurz: gur cevrfg gung znxrgu ngbarzrag gurerjvgu funyy unir
vg.

7:8 Naq gur cevrfg gung bssrergu nal zna'f oheag bssrevat, rira gur
cevrfg funyy unir gb uvzfrys gur fxva bs gur oheag bssrevat juvpu ur
ungu bssrerq.

7:9 Naq nyy gur zrng bssrevat gung vf onxra va gur bira, naq nyy gung
vf qerffrq va gur selvatcna, naq va gur cna, funyy or gur cevrfg'f
gung bssrergu vg.

7:10 Naq rirel zrng bssrevat, zvatyrq jvgu bvy, naq qel, funyy nyy gur
fbaf bs Nneba unir, bar nf zhpu nf nabgure.

7:11 Naq guvf vf gur ynj bs gur fnpevsvpr bs crnpr bssrevatf, juvpu ur
funyy bssre hagb gur YBEQ.

7:12 Vs ur bssre vg sbe n gunaxftvivat, gura ur funyy bssre jvgu gur
fnpevsvpr bs gunaxftvivat hayrnirarq pnxrf zvatyrq jvgu bvy, naq
hayrnirarq jnsref nabvagrq jvgu bvy, naq pnxrf zvatyrq jvgu bvy, bs
svar sybhe, sevrq.

7:13 Orfvqrf gur pnxrf, ur funyy bssre sbe uvf bssrevat yrnirarq oernq
jvgu gur fnpevsvpr bs gunaxftvivat bs uvf crnpr bssrevatf.

7:14 Naq bs vg ur funyy bssre bar bhg bs gur jubyr boyngvba sbe na
urnir bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ, naq vg funyy or gur cevrfg'f gung
fcevaxyrgu gur oybbq bs gur crnpr bssrevatf.

7:15 Naq gur syrfu bs gur fnpevsvpr bs uvf crnpr bssrevatf sbe
gunaxftvivat funyy or rngra gur fnzr qnl gung vg vf bssrerq; ur funyy
abg yrnir nal bs vg hagvy gur zbeavat.

7:16 Ohg vs gur fnpevsvpr bs uvf bssrevat or n ibj, be n ibyhagnel
bssrevat, vg funyy or rngra gur fnzr qnl gung ur bssrergu uvf
fnpevsvpr: naq ba gur zbeebj nyfb gur erznvaqre bs vg funyy or rngra:
7:17 Ohg gur erznvaqre bs gur syrfu bs gur fnpevsvpr ba gur guveq qnl
funyy or oheag jvgu sver.

7:18 Naq vs nal bs gur syrfu bs gur fnpevsvpr bs uvf crnpr bssrevatf
or rngra ng nyy ba gur guveq qnl, vg funyy abg or npprcgrq, arvgure
funyy vg or vzchgrq hagb uvz gung bssrergu vg: vg funyy or na
nobzvangvba, naq gur fbhy gung rngrgu bs vg funyy orne uvf vavdhvgl.

7:19 Naq gur syrfu gung gbhpurgu nal hapyrna guvat funyy abg or rngra;
vg funyy or oheag jvgu sver: naq nf sbe gur syrfu, nyy gung or pyrna
funyy rng gurerbs.

7:20 Ohg gur fbhy gung rngrgu bs gur syrfu bs gur fnpevsvpr bs crnpr
bssrevatf, gung cregnva hagb gur YBEQ, univat uvf hapyrnaarff hcba
uvz, rira gung fbhy funyy or phg bss sebz uvf crbcyr.

7:21 Zberbire gur fbhy gung funyy gbhpu nal hapyrna guvat, nf gur
hapyrnaarff bs zna, be nal hapyrna ornfg, be nal nobzvanoyr hapyrna
guvat, naq rng bs gur syrfu bs gur fnpevsvpr bs crnpr bssrevatf, juvpu
cregnva hagb gur YBEQ, rira gung fbhy funyy or phg bss sebz uvf
crbcyr.

7:22 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 7:23 Fcrnx hagb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Lr funyy rng ab znaare bs sng, bs bk, be
bs furrc, be bs tbng.

7:24 Naq gur sng bs gur ornfg gung qvrgu bs vgfrys, naq gur sng bs
gung juvpu vf gbea jvgu ornfgf, znl or hfrq va nal bgure hfr: ohg lr
funyy va ab jvfr rng bs vg.

7:25 Sbe jubfbrire rngrgu gur sng bs gur ornfg, bs juvpu zra bssre na
bssrevat znqr ol sver hagb gur YBEQ, rira gur fbhy gung rngrgu vg
funyy or phg bss sebz uvf crbcyr.

7:26 Zberbire lr funyy rng ab znaare bs oybbq, jurgure vg or bs sbjy
be bs ornfg, va nal bs lbhe qjryyvatf.

7:27 Jungfbrire fbhy vg or gung rngrgu nal znaare bs oybbq, rira gung
fbhy funyy or phg bss sebz uvf crbcyr.

7:28 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 7:29 Fcrnx hagb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Ur gung bssrergu gur fnpevsvpr bs uvf
crnpr bssrevatf hagb gur YBEQ funyy oevat uvf boyngvba hagb gur YBEQ
bs gur fnpevsvpr bs uvf crnpr bssrevatf.

7:30 Uvf bja unaqf funyy oevat gur bssrevatf bs gur YBEQ znqr ol sver,
gur sng jvgu gur oernfg, vg funyy ur oevat, gung gur oernfg znl or
jnirq sbe n jnir bssrevat orsber gur YBEQ.

7:31 Naq gur cevrfg funyy ohea gur sng hcba gur nygne: ohg gur oernfg
funyy or Nneba'f naq uvf fbaf'.

7:32 Naq gur evtug fubhyqre funyy lr tvir hagb gur cevrfg sbe na urnir
bssrevat bs gur fnpevsvprf bs lbhe crnpr bssrevatf.

7:33 Ur nzbat gur fbaf bs Nneba, gung bssrergu gur oybbq bs gur crnpr
bssrevatf, naq gur sng, funyy unir gur evtug fubhyqre sbe uvf cneg.

7:34 Sbe gur jnir oernfg naq gur urnir fubhyqre unir V gnxra bs gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry sebz bss gur fnpevsvprf bs gurve crnpr bssrevatf,
naq unir tvira gurz hagb Nneba gur cevrfg naq hagb uvf fbaf ol n
fgnghgr sbe rire sebz nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

7:35 Guvf vf gur cbegvba bs gur nabvagvat bs Nneba, naq bs gur
nabvagvat bs uvf fbaf, bhg bs gur bssrevatf bs gur YBEQ znqr ol sver,
va gur qnl jura ur cerfragrq gurz gb zvavfgre hagb gur YBEQ va gur
cevrfg'f bssvpr; 7:36 Juvpu gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq gb or tvira gurz bs gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, va gur qnl gung ur nabvagrq gurz, ol n fgnghgr sbe
rire guebhtubhg gurve trarengvbaf.

7:37 Guvf vf gur ynj bs gur oheag bssrevat, bs gur zrng bssrevat, naq
bs gur fva bssrevat, naq bs gur gerfcnff bssrevat, naq bs gur
pbafrpengvbaf, naq bs gur fnpevsvpr bs gur crnpr bssrevatf; 7:38 Juvpu
gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf va zbhag Fvanv, va gur qnl gung ur pbzznaqrq
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry gb bssre gurve boyngvbaf hagb gur YBEQ, va gur
jvyqrearff bs Fvanv.

8:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 8:2 Gnxr Nneba naq uvf fbaf
jvgu uvz, naq gur tnezragf, naq gur nabvagvat bvy, naq n ohyybpx sbe
gur fva bssrevat, naq gjb enzf, naq n onfxrg bs hayrnirarq oernq; 8:3
Naq tngure gubh nyy gur pbatertngvba gbtrgure hagb gur qbbe bs gur
gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba.

8:4 Naq Zbfrf qvq nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq uvz; naq gur nffrzoyl jnf
tngurerq gbtrgure hagb gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba.

8:5 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb gur pbatertngvba, Guvf vf gur guvat juvpu gur
YBEQ pbzznaqrq gb or qbar.

8:6 Naq Zbfrf oebhtug Nneba naq uvf fbaf, naq jnfurq gurz jvgu jngre.

8:7 Naq ur chg hcba uvz gur pbng, naq tveqrq uvz jvgu gur tveqyr, naq
pybgurq uvz jvgu gur ebor, naq chg gur rcubq hcba uvz, naq ur tveqrq
uvz jvgu gur phevbhf tveqyr bs gur rcubq, naq obhaq vg hagb uvz
gurerjvgu.

8:8 Naq ur chg gur oernfgcyngr hcba uvz: nyfb ur chg va gur
oernfgcyngr gur Hevz naq gur Guhzzvz.

8:9 Naq ur chg gur zvger hcba uvf urnq; nyfb hcba gur zvger, rira hcba
uvf sbersebag, qvq ur chg gur tbyqra cyngr, gur ubyl pebja; nf gur
YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

8:10 Naq Zbfrf gbbx gur nabvagvat bvy, naq nabvagrq gur gnoreanpyr naq
nyy gung jnf gurerva, naq fnapgvsvrq gurz.

8:11 Naq ur fcevaxyrq gurerbs hcba gur nygne frira gvzrf, naq nabvagrq
gur nygne naq nyy uvf irffryf, obgu gur ynire naq uvf sbbg, gb
fnapgvsl gurz.

8:12 Naq ur cbherq bs gur nabvagvat bvy hcba Nneba'f urnq, naq
nabvagrq uvz, gb fnapgvsl uvz.

8:13 Naq Zbfrf oebhtug Nneba'f fbaf, naq chg pbngf hcba gurz, naq
tveqrq gurz jvgu tveqyrf, naq chg obaargf hcba gurz; nf gur YBEQ
pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

8:14 Naq ur oebhtug gur ohyybpx sbe gur fva bssrevat: naq Nneba naq
uvf fbaf ynvq gurve unaqf hcba gur urnq bs gur ohyybpx sbe gur fva
bssrevat.

8:15 Naq ur fyrj vg; naq Zbfrf gbbx gur oybbq, naq chg vg hcba gur
ubeaf bs gur nygne ebhaq nobhg jvgu uvf svatre, naq chevsvrq gur
nygne, naq cbherq gur oybbq ng gur obggbz bs gur nygne, naq fnapgvsvrq
vg, gb znxr erpbapvyvngvba hcba vg.

8:16 Naq ur gbbx nyy gur sng gung jnf hcba gur vajneqf, naq gur pnhy
nobir gur yvire, naq gur gjb xvqarlf, naq gurve sng, naq Zbfrf ohearq
vg hcba gur nygne.

8:17 Ohg gur ohyybpx, naq uvf uvqr, uvf syrfu, naq uvf qhat, ur oheag
jvgu sver jvgubhg gur pnzc; nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

8:18 Naq ur oebhtug gur enz sbe gur oheag bssrevat: naq Nneba naq uvf
fbaf ynvq gurve unaqf hcba gur urnq bs gur enz.

8:19 Naq ur xvyyrq vg; naq Zbfrf fcevaxyrq gur oybbq hcba gur nygne
ebhaq nobhg.

8:20 Naq ur phg gur enz vagb cvrprf; naq Zbfrf oheag gur urnq, naq gur
cvrprf, naq gur sng.

8:21 Naq ur jnfurq gur vajneqf naq gur yrtf va jngre; naq Zbfrf oheag
gur jubyr enz hcba gur nygne: vg jnf n oheag fnpevsvpr sbe n fjrrg
fnibhe, naq na bssrevat znqr ol sver hagb gur YBEQ; nf gur YBEQ
pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

8:22 Naq ur oebhtug gur bgure enz, gur enz bs pbafrpengvba: naq Nneba
naq uvf fbaf ynvq gurve unaqf hcba gur urnq bs gur enz.

8:23 Naq ur fyrj vg; naq Zbfrf gbbx bs gur oybbq bs vg, naq chg vg
hcba gur gvc bs Nneba'f evtug rne, naq hcba gur guhzo bs uvf evtug
unaq, naq hcba gur terng gbr bs uvf evtug sbbg.

8:24 Naq ur oebhtug Nneba'f fbaf, naq Zbfrf chg bs gur oybbq hcba gur
gvc bs gurve evtug rne, naq hcba gur guhzof bs gurve evtug unaqf, naq
hcba gur terng gbrf bs gurve evtug srrg: naq Zbfrf fcevaxyrq gur oybbq
hcba gur nygne ebhaq nobhg.

8:25 Naq ur gbbx gur sng, naq gur ehzc, naq nyy gur sng gung jnf hcba
gur vajneqf, naq gur pnhy nobir gur yvire, naq gur gjb xvqarlf, naq
gurve sng, naq gur evtug fubhyqre: 8:26 Naq bhg bs gur onfxrg bs
hayrnirarq oernq, gung jnf orsber gur YBEQ, ur gbbx bar hayrnirarq
pnxr, naq n pnxr bs bvyrq oernq, naq bar jnsre, naq chg gurz ba gur
sng, naq hcba gur evtug fubhyqre: 8:27 Naq ur chg nyy hcba Nneba'f
unaqf, naq hcba uvf fbaf' unaqf, naq jnirq gurz sbe n jnir bssrevat
orsber gur YBEQ.

8:28 Naq Zbfrf gbbx gurz sebz bss gurve unaqf, naq oheag gurz ba gur
nygne hcba gur oheag bssrevat: gurl jrer pbafrpengvbaf sbe n fjrrg
fnibhe: vg vf na bssrevat znqr ol sver hagb gur YBEQ.

8:29 Naq Zbfrf gbbx gur oernfg, naq jnirq vg sbe n jnir bssrevat
orsber gur YBEQ: sbe bs gur enz bs pbafrpengvba vg jnf Zbfrf' cneg; nf
gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

8:30 Naq Zbfrf gbbx bs gur nabvagvat bvy, naq bs gur oybbq juvpu jnf
hcba gur nygne, naq fcevaxyrq vg hcba Nneba, naq hcba uvf tnezragf,
naq hcba uvf fbaf, naq hcba uvf fbaf' tnezragf jvgu uvz; naq
fnapgvsvrq Nneba, naq uvf tnezragf, naq uvf fbaf, naq uvf fbaf'
tnezragf jvgu uvz.

8:31 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb Nneba naq gb uvf fbaf, Obvy gur syrfu ng gur
qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba: naq gurer rng vg jvgu gur
oernq gung vf va gur onfxrg bs pbafrpengvbaf, nf V pbzznaqrq, fnlvat,
Nneba naq uvf fbaf funyy rng vg.

8:32 Naq gung juvpu erznvargu bs gur syrfu naq bs gur oernq funyy lr
ohea jvgu sver.

8:33 Naq lr funyy abg tb bhg bs gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba va frira qnlf, hagvy gur qnlf bs lbhe pbafrpengvba or ng
na raq: sbe frira qnlf funyy ur pbafrpengr lbh.

8:34 Nf ur ungu qbar guvf qnl, fb gur YBEQ ungu pbzznaqrq gb qb, gb
znxr na ngbarzrag sbe lbh.

8:35 Gurersber funyy lr novqr ng gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba qnl naq avtug frira qnlf, naq xrrc gur punetr bs gur
YBEQ, gung lr qvr abg: sbe fb V nz pbzznaqrq.

8:36 Fb Nneba naq uvf fbaf qvq nyy guvatf juvpu gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq ol
gur unaq bs Zbfrf.

9:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ba gur rvtugu qnl, gung Zbfrf pnyyrq Nneba naq
uvf fbaf, naq gur ryqref bs Vfenry; 9:2 Naq ur fnvq hagb Nneba, Gnxr
gurr n lbhat pnys sbe n fva bssrevat, naq n enz sbe n oheag bssrevat,
jvgubhg oyrzvfu, naq bssre gurz orsber gur YBEQ.

9:3 Naq hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry gubh funyg fcrnx, fnlvat, Gnxr lr
n xvq bs gur tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat; naq n pnys naq n ynzo, obgu bs
gur svefg lrne, jvgubhg oyrzvfu, sbe n oheag bssrevat; 9:4 Nyfb n
ohyybpx naq n enz sbe crnpr bssrevatf, gb fnpevsvpr orsber gur YBEQ;
naq n zrng bssrevat zvatyrq jvgu bvy: sbe gb qnl gur YBEQ jvyy nccrne
hagb lbh.

9:5 Naq gurl oebhtug gung juvpu Zbfrf pbzznaqrq orsber gur gnoreanpyr
bs gur pbatertngvba: naq nyy gur pbatertngvba qerj arne naq fgbbq
orsber gur YBEQ.

9:6 Naq Zbfrf fnvq, Guvf vf gur guvat juvpu gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq gung lr
fubhyq qb: naq gur tybel bs gur YBEQ funyy nccrne hagb lbh.

9:7 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb Nneba, Tb hagb gur nygne, naq bssre gul fva
bssrevat, naq gul oheag bssrevat, naq znxr na ngbarzrag sbe gulfrys,
naq sbe gur crbcyr: naq bssre gur bssrevat bs gur crbcyr, naq znxr na
ngbarzrag sbe gurz; nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq.

9:8 Nneba gurersber jrag hagb gur nygne, naq fyrj gur pnys bs gur fva
bssrevat, juvpu jnf sbe uvzfrys.

9:9 Naq gur fbaf bs Nneba oebhtug gur oybbq hagb uvz: naq ur qvccrq
uvf svatre va gur oybbq, naq chg vg hcba gur ubeaf bs gur nygne, naq
cbherq bhg gur oybbq ng gur obggbz bs gur nygne: 9:10 Ohg gur sng, naq
gur xvqarlf, naq gur pnhy nobir gur yvire bs gur fva bssrevat, ur
oheag hcba gur nygne; nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

9:11 Naq gur syrfu naq gur uvqr ur oheag jvgu sver jvgubhg gur pnzc.

9:12 Naq ur fyrj gur oheag bssrevat; naq Nneba'f fbaf cerfragrq hagb
uvz gur oybbq, juvpu ur fcevaxyrq ebhaq nobhg hcba gur nygne.

9:13 Naq gurl cerfragrq gur oheag bssrevat hagb uvz, jvgu gur cvrprf
gurerbs, naq gur urnq: naq ur oheag gurz hcba gur nygne.

9:14 Naq ur qvq jnfu gur vajneqf naq gur yrtf, naq oheag gurz hcba gur
oheag bssrevat ba gur nygne.

9:15 Naq ur oebhtug gur crbcyr'f bssrevat, naq gbbx gur tbng, juvpu
jnf gur fva bssrevat sbe gur crbcyr, naq fyrj vg, naq bssrerq vg sbe
fva, nf gur svefg.

9:16 Naq ur oebhtug gur oheag bssrevat, naq bssrerq vg nppbeqvat gb
gur znaare.

9:17 Naq ur oebhtug gur zrng bssrevat, naq gbbx na unaqshy gurerbs,
naq oheag vg hcba gur nygne, orfvqr gur oheag fnpevsvpr bs gur
zbeavat.

9:18 Ur fyrj nyfb gur ohyybpx naq gur enz sbe n fnpevsvpr bs crnpr
bssrevatf, juvpu jnf sbe gur crbcyr: naq Nneba'f fbaf cerfragrq hagb
uvz gur oybbq, juvpu ur fcevaxyrq hcba gur nygne ebhaq nobhg, 9:19 Naq
gur sng bs gur ohyybpx naq bs gur enz, gur ehzc, naq gung juvpu
pbirergu gur vajneqf, naq gur xvqarlf, naq gur pnhy nobir gur yvire:
9:20 Naq gurl chg gur sng hcba gur oernfgf, naq ur oheag gur sng hcba
gur nygne: 9:21 Naq gur oernfgf naq gur evtug fubhyqre Nneba jnirq sbe
n jnir bssrevat orsber gur YBEQ; nf Zbfrf pbzznaqrq.

9:22 Naq Nneba yvsgrq hc uvf unaq gbjneq gur crbcyr, naq oyrffrq gurz,
naq pnzr qbja sebz bssrevat bs gur fva bssrevat, naq gur oheag
bssrevat, naq crnpr bssrevatf.

9:23 Naq Zbfrf naq Nneba jrag vagb gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba,
naq pnzr bhg, naq oyrffrq gur crbcyr: naq gur tybel bs gur YBEQ
nccrnerq hagb nyy gur crbcyr.

9:24 Naq gurer pnzr n sver bhg sebz orsber gur YBEQ, naq pbafhzrq hcba
gur nygne gur oheag bssrevat naq gur sng: juvpu jura nyy gur crbcyr
fnj, gurl fubhgrq, naq sryy ba gurve snprf.

10:1 Naq Anqno naq Novuh, gur fbaf bs Nneba, gbbx rvgure bs gurz uvf
prafre, naq chg sver gurerva, naq chg vaprafr gurerba, naq bssrerq
fgenatr sver orsber gur YBEQ, juvpu ur pbzznaqrq gurz abg.

10:2 Naq gurer jrag bhg sver sebz gur YBEQ, naq qribherq gurz, naq
gurl qvrq orsber gur YBEQ.

10:3 Gura Zbfrf fnvq hagb Nneba, Guvf vf vg gung gur YBEQ fcnxr,
fnlvat, V jvyy or fnapgvsvrq va gurz gung pbzr avtu zr, naq orsber nyy
gur crbcyr V jvyy or tybevsvrq. Naq Nneba uryq uvf crnpr.

10:4 Naq Zbfrf pnyyrq Zvfunry naq Rymncuna, gur fbaf bs Hmmvry gur
hapyr bs Nneba, naq fnvq hagb gurz, Pbzr arne, pneel lbhe oerguera
sebz orsber gur fnapghnel bhg bs gur pnzc.

10:5 Fb gurl jrag arne, naq pneevrq gurz va gurve pbngf bhg bs gur
pnzc; nf Zbfrf unq fnvq.

10:6 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb Nneba, naq hagb Ryrnmne naq hagb Vgunzne, uvf
fbaf, Hapbire abg lbhe urnqf, arvgure eraq lbhe pybgurf; yrfg lr qvr,
naq yrfg jengu pbzr hcba nyy gur crbcyr: ohg yrg lbhe oerguera, gur
jubyr ubhfr bs Vfenry, orjnvy gur oheavat juvpu gur YBEQ ungu xvaqyrq.

10:7 Naq lr funyy abg tb bhg sebz gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba, yrfg lr qvr: sbe gur nabvagvat bvy bs gur YBEQ vf hcba
lbh. Naq gurl qvq nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs Zbfrf.

10:8 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Nneba, fnlvat, 10:9 Qb abg qevax jvar abe
fgebat qevax, gubh, abe gul fbaf jvgu gurr, jura lr tb vagb gur
gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, yrfg lr qvr: vg funyy or n fgnghgr sbe
rire guebhtubhg lbhe trarengvbaf: 10:10 Naq gung lr znl chg qvssrerapr
orgjrra ubyl naq haubyl, naq orgjrra hapyrna naq pyrna; 10:11 Naq gung
lr znl grnpu gur puvyqera bs Vfenry nyy gur fgnghgrf juvpu gur YBEQ
ungu fcbxra hagb gurz ol gur unaq bs Zbfrf.

10:12 Naq Zbfrf fcnxr hagb Nneba, naq hagb Ryrnmne naq hagb Vgunzne,
uvf fbaf gung jrer yrsg, Gnxr gur zrng bssrevat gung erznvargu bs gur
bssrevatf bs gur YBEQ znqr ol sver, naq rng vg jvgubhg yrnira orfvqr
gur nygne: sbe vg vf zbfg ubyl: 10:13 Naq lr funyy rng vg va gur ubyl
cynpr, orpnhfr vg vf gul qhr, naq gul fbaf' qhr, bs gur fnpevsvprf bs
gur YBEQ znqr ol sver: sbe fb V nz pbzznaqrq.

10:14 Naq gur jnir oernfg naq urnir fubhyqre funyy lr rng va n pyrna
cynpr; gubh, naq gul fbaf, naq gul qnhtugref jvgu gurr: sbe gurl or
gul qhr, naq gul fbaf' qhr, juvpu ner tvira bhg bs gur fnpevsvprf bs
crnpr bssrevatf bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

10:15 Gur urnir fubhyqre naq gur jnir oernfg funyy gurl oevat jvgu gur
bssrevatf znqr ol sver bs gur sng, gb jnir vg sbe n jnir bssrevat
orsber gur YBEQ; naq vg funyy or guvar, naq gul fbaf' jvgu gurr, ol n
fgnghgr sbe rire; nf gur YBEQ ungu pbzznaqrq.

10:16 Naq Zbfrf qvyvtragyl fbhtug gur tbng bs gur fva bssrevat, naq,
orubyq, vg jnf oheag: naq ur jnf natel jvgu Ryrnmne naq Vgunzne, gur
fbaf bs Nneba juvpu jrer yrsg nyvir, fnlvat, 10:17 Jurersber unir lr
abg rngra gur fva bssrevat va gur ubyl cynpr, frrvat vg vf zbfg ubyl,
naq Tbq ungu tvira vg lbh gb orne gur vavdhvgl bs gur pbatertngvba, gb
znxr ngbarzrag sbe gurz orsber gur YBEQ?  10:18 Orubyq, gur oybbq bs
vg jnf abg oebhtug va jvguva gur ubyl cynpr: lr fubhyq vaqrrq unir
rngra vg va gur ubyl cynpr, nf V pbzznaqrq.

10:19 Naq Nneba fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Orubyq, guvf qnl unir gurl bssrerq
gurve fva bssrevat naq gurve oheag bssrevat orsber gur YBEQ; naq fhpu
guvatf unir orsnyyra zr: naq vs V unq rngra gur fva bssrevat gb qnl,
fubhyq vg unir orra npprcgrq va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ?  10:20 Naq jura
Zbfrf urneq gung, ur jnf pbagrag.

11:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf naq gb Nneba, fnlvat hagb gurz,
11:2 Fcrnx hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Gurfr ner gur ornfgf
juvpu lr funyy rng nzbat nyy gur ornfgf gung ner ba gur rnegu.

11:3 Jungfbrire cnegrgu gur ubbs, naq vf pybirasbbgrq, naq purjrgu gur
phq, nzbat gur ornfgf, gung funyy lr rng.

11:4 Arireguryrff gurfr funyy lr abg rng bs gurz gung purj gur phq, be
bs gurz gung qvivqr gur ubbs: nf gur pnzry, orpnhfr ur purjrgu gur
phq, ohg qvivqrgu abg gur ubbs; ur vf hapyrna hagb lbh.

11:5 Naq gur pbarl, orpnhfr ur purjrgu gur phq, ohg qvivqrgu abg gur
ubbs; ur vf hapyrna hagb lbh.

11:6 Naq gur uner, orpnhfr ur purjrgu gur phq, ohg qvivqrgu abg gur
ubbs; ur vf hapyrna hagb lbh.

11:7 Naq gur fjvar, gubhtu ur qvivqr gur ubbs, naq or pybirasbbgrq,
lrg ur purjrgu abg gur phq; ur vf hapyrna gb lbh.

11:8 Bs gurve syrfu funyy lr abg rng, naq gurve pnepnfr funyy lr abg
gbhpu; gurl ner hapyrna gb lbh.

11:9 Gurfr funyy lr rng bs nyy gung ner va gur jngref: jungfbrire ungu
svaf naq fpnyrf va gur jngref, va gur frnf, naq va gur eviref, gurz
funyy lr rng.

11:10 Naq nyy gung unir abg svaf naq fpnyrf va gur frnf, naq va gur
eviref, bs nyy gung zbir va gur jngref, naq bs nal yvivat guvat juvpu
vf va gur jngref, gurl funyy or na nobzvangvba hagb lbh: 11:11 Gurl
funyy or rira na nobzvangvba hagb lbh; lr funyy abg rng bs gurve
syrfu, ohg lr funyy unir gurve pnepnfrf va nobzvangvba.

11:12 Jungfbrire ungu ab svaf abe fpnyrf va gur jngref, gung funyy or
na nobzvangvba hagb lbh.

11:13 Naq gurfr ner gurl juvpu lr funyy unir va nobzvangvba nzbat gur
sbjyf; gurl funyy abg or rngra, gurl ner na nobzvangvba: gur rntyr,
naq gur bffvsentr, naq gur bfcenl, 11:14 Naq gur ihygher, naq gur xvgr
nsgre uvf xvaq; 11:15 Rirel enira nsgre uvf xvaq; 11:16 Naq gur bjy,
naq gur avtug unjx, naq gur phpxbj, naq gur unjx nsgre uvf xvaq, 11:17
Naq gur yvggyr bjy, naq gur pbezbenag, naq gur terng bjy, 11:18 Naq
gur fjna, naq gur cryvpna, naq gur tvre rntyr, 11:19 Naq gur fgbex,
gur ureba nsgre ure xvaq, naq gur yncjvat, naq gur ong.

11:20 Nyy sbjyf gung perrc, tbvat hcba nyy sbhe, funyy or na
nobzvangvba hagb lbh.

11:21 Lrg gurfr znl lr rng bs rirel sylvat perrcvat guvat gung tbrgu
hcba nyy sbhe, juvpu unir yrtf nobir gurve srrg, gb yrnc jvguny hcba
gur rnegu; 11:22 Rira gurfr bs gurz lr znl rng; gur ybphfg nsgre uvf
xvaq, naq gur onyq ybphfg nsgre uvf xvaq, naq gur orrgyr nsgre uvf
xvaq, naq gur tenffubccre nsgre uvf xvaq.

11:23 Ohg nyy bgure sylvat perrcvat guvatf, juvpu unir sbhe srrg,
funyy or na nobzvangvba hagb lbh.

11:24 Naq sbe gurfr lr funyy or hapyrna: jubfbrire gbhpurgu gur
pnepnfr bs gurz funyy or hapyrna hagvy gur rira.

11:25 Naq jubfbrire ornergu bhtug bs gur pnepnfr bs gurz funyy jnfu
uvf pybgurf, naq or hapyrna hagvy gur rira.

11:26 Gur pnepnfrf bs rirel ornfg juvpu qvivqrgu gur ubbs, naq vf abg
pybirasbbgrq, abe purjrgu gur phq, ner hapyrna hagb lbh: rirel bar
gung gbhpurgu gurz funyy or hapyrna.

11:27 Naq jungfbrire tbrgu hcba uvf cnjf, nzbat nyy znaare bs ornfgf
gung tb ba nyy sbhe, gubfr ner hapyrna hagb lbh: jubfb gbhpurgu gurve
pnepnfr funyy or hapyrna hagvy gur rira.

11:28 Naq ur gung ornergu gur pnepnfr bs gurz funyy jnfu uvf pybgurf,
naq or hapyrna hagvy gur rira: gurl ner hapyrna hagb lbh.

11:29 Gurfr nyfb funyy or hapyrna hagb lbh nzbat gur perrcvat guvatf
gung perrc hcba gur rnegu; gur jrnfry, naq gur zbhfr, naq gur gbegbvfr
nsgre uvf xvaq, 11:30 Naq gur sreerg, naq gur punzryrba, naq gur
yvmneq, naq gur fanvy, naq gur zbyr.

11:31 Gurfr ner hapyrna gb lbh nzbat nyy gung perrc: jubfbrire qbgu
gbhpu gurz, jura gurl or qrnq, funyy or hapyrna hagvy gur rira.

11:32 Naq hcba jungfbrire nal bs gurz, jura gurl ner qrnq, qbgu snyy,
vg funyy or hapyrna; jurgure vg or nal irffry bs jbbq, be envzrag, be
fxva, be fnpx, jungfbrire irffry vg or, jurerva nal jbex vf qbar, vg
zhfg or chg vagb jngre, naq vg funyy or hapyrna hagvy gur rira; fb vg
funyy or pyrnafrq.

11:33 Naq rirel rnegura irffry, jurervagb nal bs gurz snyyrgu,
jungfbrire vf va vg funyy or hapyrna; naq lr funyy oernx vg.

11:34 Bs nyy zrng juvpu znl or rngra, gung ba juvpu fhpu jngre pbzrgu
funyy or hapyrna: naq nyy qevax gung znl or qehax va rirel fhpu irffry
funyy or hapyrna.

11:35 Naq rirel guvat jurerhcba nal cneg bs gurve pnepnfr snyyrgu
funyy or hapyrna; jurgure vg or bira, be enatrf sbe cbgf, gurl funyy
or oebxra qbja: sbe gurl ner hapyrna naq funyy or hapyrna hagb lbh.

11:36 Arireguryrff n sbhagnva be cvg, jurerva gurer vf cyragl bs
jngre, funyy or pyrna: ohg gung juvpu gbhpurgu gurve pnepnfr funyy or
hapyrna.

11:37 Naq vs nal cneg bs gurve pnepnfr snyy hcba nal fbjvat frrq juvpu
vf gb or fbja, vg funyy or pyrna.

11:38 Ohg vs nal jngre or chg hcba gur frrq, naq nal cneg bs gurve
pnepnfr snyy gurerba, vg funyy or hapyrna hagb lbh.

11:39 Naq vs nal ornfg, bs juvpu lr znl rng, qvr; ur gung gbhpurgu gur
pnepnfr gurerbs funyy or hapyrna hagvy gur rira.

11:40 Naq ur gung rngrgu bs gur pnepnfr bs vg funyy jnfu uvf pybgurf,
naq or hapyrna hagvy gur rira: ur nyfb gung ornergu gur pnepnfr bs vg
funyy jnfu uvf pybgurf, naq or hapyrna hagvy gur rira.

11:41 Naq rirel perrcvat guvat gung perrcrgu hcba gur rnegu funyy or
na nobzvangvba; vg funyy abg or rngra.

11:42 Jungfbrire tbrgu hcba gur oryyl, naq jungfbrire tbrgu hcba nyy
sbhe, be jungfbrire ungu zber srrg nzbat nyy perrcvat guvatf gung
perrc hcba gur rnegu, gurz lr funyy abg rng; sbe gurl ner na
nobzvangvba.

11:43 Lr funyy abg znxr lbhefryirf nobzvanoyr jvgu nal perrcvat guvat
gung perrcrgu, arvgure funyy lr znxr lbhefryirf hapyrna jvgu gurz,
gung lr fubhyq or qrsvyrq gurerol.

11:44 Sbe V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq: lr funyy gurersber fnapgvsl
lbhefryirf, naq lr funyy or ubyl; sbe V nz ubyl: arvgure funyy lr
qrsvyr lbhefryirf jvgu nal znaare bs perrcvat guvat gung perrcrgu hcba
gur rnegu.

11:45 Sbe V nz gur YBEQ gung oevatrgu lbh hc bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg,
gb or lbhe Tbq: lr funyy gurersber or ubyl, sbe V nz ubyl.

11:46 Guvf vf gur ynj bs gur ornfgf, naq bs gur sbjy, naq bs rirel
yvivat perngher gung zbirgu va gur jngref, naq bs rirel perngher gung
perrcrgu hcba gur rnegu: 11:47 Gb znxr n qvssrerapr orgjrra gur
hapyrna naq gur pyrna, naq orgjrra gur ornfg gung znl or rngra naq gur
ornfg gung znl abg or rngra.

12:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 12:2 Fcrnx hagb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Vs n jbzna unir pbaprvirq frrq, naq obea n
zna puvyq: gura fur funyy or hapyrna frira qnlf; nppbeqvat gb gur qnlf
bs gur frcnengvba sbe ure vasvezvgl funyy fur or hapyrna.

12:3 Naq va gur rvtugu qnl gur syrfu bs uvf sberfxva funyy or
pvephzpvfrq.

12:4 Naq fur funyy gura pbagvahr va gur oybbq bs ure chevslvat guerr
naq guvegl qnlf; fur funyy gbhpu ab unyybjrq guvat, abe pbzr vagb gur
fnapghnel, hagvy gur qnlf bs ure chevslvat or shysvyyrq.

12:5 Ohg vs fur orne n znvq puvyq, gura fur funyy or hapyrna gjb
jrrxf, nf va ure frcnengvba: naq fur funyy pbagvahr va gur oybbq bs
ure chevslvat guerrfpber naq fvk qnlf.

12:6 Naq jura gur qnlf bs ure chevslvat ner shysvyyrq, sbe n fba, be
sbe n qnhtugre, fur funyy oevat n ynzo bs gur svefg lrne sbe n oheag
bssrevat, naq n lbhat cvtrba, be n ghegyrqbir, sbe n fva bssrevat,
hagb gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, hagb gur cevrfg:
12:7 Jub funyy bssre vg orsber gur YBEQ, naq znxr na ngbarzrag sbe
ure; naq fur funyy or pyrnafrq sebz gur vffhr bs ure oybbq. Guvf vf
gur ynj sbe ure gung ungu obea n znyr be n srznyr.

12:8 Naq vs fur or abg noyr gb oevat n ynzo, gura fur funyy oevat gjb
ghegyrf, be gjb lbhat cvtrbaf; gur bar sbe gur oheag bssrevat, naq gur
bgure sbe n fva bssrevat: naq gur cevrfg funyy znxr na ngbarzrag sbe
ure, naq fur funyy or pyrna.

13:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf naq Nneba, fnlvat, 13:2 Jura n zna
funyy unir va gur fxva bs uvf syrfu n evfvat, n fpno, be oevtug fcbg,
naq vg or va gur fxva bs uvf syrfu yvxr gur cynthr bs yrcebfl; gura ur
funyy or oebhtug hagb Nneba gur cevrfg, be hagb bar bs uvf fbaf gur
cevrfgf: 13:3 Naq gur cevrfg funyy ybbx ba gur cynthr va gur fxva bs
gur syrfu: naq jura gur unve va gur cynthr vf ghearq juvgr, naq gur
cynthr va fvtug or qrrcre guna gur fxva bs uvf syrfu, vg vf n cynthr
bs yrcebfl: naq gur cevrfg funyy ybbx ba uvz, naq cebabhapr uvz
hapyrna.

13:4 Vs gur oevtug fcbg or juvgr va gur fxva bs uvf syrfu, naq va
fvtug or abg qrrcre guna gur fxva, naq gur unve gurerbs or abg ghearq
juvgr; gura gur cevrfg funyy fuhg hc uvz gung ungu gur cynthr frira
qnlf: 13:5 Naq gur cevrfg funyy ybbx ba uvz gur friragu qnl: naq,
orubyq, vs gur cynthr va uvf fvtug or ng n fgnl, naq gur cynthr fcernq
abg va gur fxva; gura gur cevrfg funyy fuhg uvz hc frira qnlf zber:
13:6 Naq gur cevrfg funyy ybbx ba uvz ntnva gur friragu qnl: naq,
orubyq, vs gur cynthr or fbzrjung qnex, naq gur cynthr fcernq abg va
gur fxva, gur cevrfg funyy cebabhapr uvz pyrna: vg vf ohg n fpno: naq
ur funyy jnfu uvf pybgurf, naq or pyrna.

13:7 Ohg vs gur fpno fcernq zhpu noebnq va gur fxva, nsgre gung ur
ungu orra frra bs gur cevrfg sbe uvf pyrnafvat, ur funyy or frra bs
gur cevrfg ntnva.

13:8 Naq vs gur cevrfg frr gung, orubyq, gur fpno fcernqrgu va gur
fxva, gura gur cevrfg funyy cebabhapr uvz hapyrna: vg vf n yrcebfl.

13:9 Jura gur cynthr bs yrcebfl vf va n zna, gura ur funyy or oebhtug
hagb gur cevrfg; 13:10 Naq gur cevrfg funyy frr uvz: naq, orubyq, vs
gur evfvat or juvgr va gur fxva, naq vg unir ghearq gur unve juvgr,
naq gurer or dhvpx enj syrfu va gur evfvat; 13:11 Vg vf na byq yrcebfl
va gur fxva bs uvf syrfu, naq gur cevrfg funyy cebabhapr uvz hapyrna,
naq funyy abg fuhg uvz hc: sbe ur vf hapyrna.

13:12 Naq vs n yrcebfl oernx bhg noebnq va gur fxva, naq gur yrcebfl
pbire nyy gur fxva bs uvz gung ungu gur cynthr sebz uvf urnq rira gb
uvf sbbg, jurerfbrire gur cevrfg ybbxrgu; 13:13 Gura gur cevrfg funyy
pbafvqre: naq, orubyq, vs gur yrcebfl unir pbirerq nyy uvf syrfu, ur
funyy cebabhapr uvz pyrna gung ungu gur cynthr: vg vf nyy ghearq
juvgr: ur vf pyrna.

13:14 Ohg jura enj syrfu nccrnergu va uvz, ur funyy or hapyrna.

13:15 Naq gur cevrfg funyy frr gur enj syrfu, naq cebabhapr uvz gb or
hapyrna: sbe gur enj syrfu vf hapyrna: vg vf n yrcebfl.

13:16 Be vs gur enj syrfu ghea ntnva, naq or punatrq hagb juvgr, ur
funyy pbzr hagb gur cevrfg; 13:17 Naq gur cevrfg funyy frr uvz: naq,
orubyq, vs gur cynthr or ghearq vagb juvgr; gura gur cevrfg funyy
cebabhapr uvz pyrna gung ungu gur cynthr: ur vf pyrna.

13:18 Gur syrfu nyfb, va juvpu, rira va gur fxva gurerbs, jnf n obvy,
naq vf urnyrq, 13:19 Naq va gur cynpr bs gur obvy gurer or n juvgr
evfvat, be n oevtug fcbg, juvgr, naq fbzrjung erqqvfu, naq vg or
furjrq gb gur cevrfg; 13:20 Naq vs, jura gur cevrfg frrgu vg, orubyq,
vg or va fvtug ybjre guna gur fxva, naq gur unve gurerbs or ghearq
juvgr; gur cevrfg funyy cebabhapr uvz hapyrna: vg vf n cynthr bs
yrcebfl oebxra bhg bs gur obvy.

13:21 Ohg vs gur cevrfg ybbx ba vg, naq, orubyq, gurer or ab juvgr
unvef gurerva, naq vs vg or abg ybjre guna gur fxva, ohg or fbzrjung
qnex; gura gur cevrfg funyy fuhg uvz hc frira qnlf: 13:22 Naq vs vg
fcernq zhpu noebnq va gur fxva, gura gur cevrfg funyy cebabhapr uvz
hapyrna: vg vf n cynthr.

13:23 Ohg vs gur oevtug fcbg fgnl va uvf cynpr, naq fcernq abg, vg vf
n oheavat obvy; naq gur cevrfg funyy cebabhapr uvz pyrna.

13:24 Be vs gurer or nal syrfu, va gur fxva jurerbs gurer vf n ubg
oheavat, naq gur dhvpx syrfu gung oheargu unir n juvgr oevtug fcbg,
fbzrjung erqqvfu, be juvgr; 13:25 Gura gur cevrfg funyy ybbx hcba vg:
naq, orubyq, vs gur unve va gur oevtug fcbg or ghearq juvgr, naq vg or
va fvtug qrrcre guna gur fxva; vg vf n yrcebfl oebxra bhg bs gur
oheavat: jurersber gur cevrfg funyy cebabhapr uvz hapyrna: vg vf gur
cynthr bs yrcebfl.

13:26 Ohg vs gur cevrfg ybbx ba vg, naq, orubyq, gurer or ab juvgr
unve va gur oevtug fcbg, naq vg or ab ybjre guna gur bgure fxva, ohg
or fbzrjung qnex; gura gur cevrfg funyy fuhg uvz hc frira qnlf: 13:27
Naq gur cevrfg funyy ybbx hcba uvz gur friragu qnl: naq vs vg or
fcernq zhpu noebnq va gur fxva, gura gur cevrfg funyy cebabhapr uvz
hapyrna: vg vf gur cynthr bs yrcebfl.

13:28 Naq vs gur oevtug fcbg fgnl va uvf cynpr, naq fcernq abg va gur
fxva, ohg vg or fbzrjung qnex; vg vf n evfvat bs gur oheavat, naq gur
cevrfg funyy cebabhapr uvz pyrna: sbe vg vf na vasynzzngvba bs gur
oheavat.

13:29 Vs n zna be jbzna unir n cynthr hcba gur urnq be gur orneq;
13:30 Gura gur cevrfg funyy frr gur cynthr: naq, orubyq, vs vg or va
fvtug qrrcre guna gur fxva; naq gurer or va vg n lryybj guva unve;
gura gur cevrfg funyy cebabhapr uvz hapyrna: vg vf n qel fpnyy, rira n
yrcebfl hcba gur urnq be orneq.

13:31 Naq vs gur cevrfg ybbx ba gur cynthr bs gur fpnyy, naq, orubyq,
vg or abg va fvtug qrrcre guna gur fxva, naq gung gurer vf ab oynpx
unve va vg; gura gur cevrfg funyy fuhg hc uvz gung ungu gur cynthr bs
gur fpnyy frira qnlf: 13:32 Naq va gur friragu qnl gur cevrfg funyy
ybbx ba gur cynthr: naq, orubyq, vs gur fpnyy fcernq abg, naq gurer or
va vg ab lryybj unve, naq gur fpnyy or abg va fvtug qrrcre guna gur
fxva; 13:33 Ur funyy or funira, ohg gur fpnyy funyy ur abg funir; naq
gur cevrfg funyy fuhg hc uvz gung ungu gur fpnyy frira qnlf zber:
13:34 Naq va gur friragu qnl gur cevrfg funyy ybbx ba gur fpnyy: naq,
orubyq, vs gur fpnyy or abg fcernq va gur fxva, abe or va fvtug qrrcre
guna gur fxva; gura gur cevrfg funyy cebabhapr uvz pyrna: naq ur funyy
jnfu uvf pybgurf, naq or pyrna.

13:35 Ohg vs gur fpnyy fcernq zhpu va gur fxva nsgre uvf pyrnafvat;
13:36 Gura gur cevrfg funyy ybbx ba uvz: naq, orubyq, vs gur fpnyy or
fcernq va gur fxva, gur cevrfg funyy abg frrx sbe lryybj unve; ur vf
hapyrna.

13:37 Ohg vs gur fpnyy or va uvf fvtug ng n fgnl, naq gung gurer vf
oynpx unve tebja hc gurerva; gur fpnyy vf urnyrq, ur vf pyrna: naq gur
cevrfg funyy cebabhapr uvz pyrna.

13:38 Vs n zna nyfb be n jbzna unir va gur fxva bs gurve syrfu oevtug
fcbgf, rira juvgr oevtug fcbgf; 13:39 Gura gur cevrfg funyy ybbx: naq,
orubyq, vs gur oevtug fcbgf va gur fxva bs gurve syrfu or qnexvfu
juvgr; vg vf n serpxyrq fcbg gung tebjrgu va gur fxva; ur vf pyrna.

13:40 Naq gur zna jubfr unve vf snyyra bss uvf urnq, ur vf onyq; lrg
vf ur pyrna.

13:41 Naq ur gung ungu uvf unve snyyra bss sebz gur cneg bs uvf urnq
gbjneq uvf snpr, ur vf sberurnq onyq: lrg vf ur pyrna.

13:42 Naq vs gurer or va gur onyq urnq, be onyq sberurnq, n juvgr
erqqvfu fber; vg vf n yrcebfl fcehat hc va uvf onyq urnq, be uvf onyq
sberurnq.

13:43 Gura gur cevrfg funyy ybbx hcba vg: naq, orubyq, vs gur evfvat
bs gur fber or juvgr erqqvfu va uvf onyq urnq, be va uvf onyq
sberurnq, nf gur yrcebfl nccrnergu va gur fxva bs gur syrfu; 13:44 Ur
vf n yrcebhf zna, ur vf hapyrna: gur cevrfg funyy cebabhapr uvz
hggreyl hapyrna; uvf cynthr vf va uvf urnq.

13:45 Naq gur yrcre va jubz gur cynthr vf, uvf pybgurf funyy or erag,
naq uvf urnq oner, naq ur funyy chg n pbirevat hcba uvf hccre yvc, naq
funyy pel, Hapyrna, hapyrna.

13:46 Nyy gur qnlf jurerva gur cynthr funyy or va uvz ur funyy or
qrsvyrq; ur vf hapyrna: ur funyy qjryy nybar; jvgubhg gur pnzc funyy
uvf unovgngvba or.

13:47 Gur tnezrag nyfb gung gur cynthr bs yrcebfl vf va, jurgure vg or
n jbbyyra tnezrag, be n yvara tnezrag; 13:48 Jurgure vg or va gur
jnec, be jbbs; bs yvara, be bs jbbyyra; jurgure va n fxva, be va nal
guvat znqr bs fxva; 13:49 Naq vs gur cynthr or terravfu be erqqvfu va
gur tnezrag, be va gur fxva, rvgure va gur jnec, be va gur jbbs, be va
nal guvat bs fxva; vg vf n cynthr bs yrcebfl, naq funyy or furjrq hagb
gur cevrfg: 13:50 Naq gur cevrfg funyy ybbx hcba gur cynthr, naq fuhg
hc vg gung ungu gur cynthr frira qnlf: 13:51 Naq ur funyy ybbx ba gur
cynthr ba gur friragu qnl: vs gur cynthr or fcernq va gur tnezrag,
rvgure va gur jnec, be va gur jbbs, be va n fxva, be va nal jbex gung
vf znqr bs fxva; gur cynthr vf n serggvat yrcebfl; vg vf hapyrna.

13:52 Ur funyy gurersber ohea gung tnezrag, jurgure jnec be jbbs, va
jbbyyra be va yvara, be nal guvat bs fxva, jurerva gur cynthr vf: sbe
vg vf n serggvat yrcebfl; vg funyy or oheag va gur sver.

13:53 Naq vs gur cevrfg funyy ybbx, naq, orubyq, gur cynthr or abg
fcernq va gur tnezrag, rvgure va gur jnec, be va gur jbbs, be va nal
guvat bs fxva; 13:54 Gura gur cevrfg funyy pbzznaq gung gurl jnfu gur
guvat jurerva gur cynthr vf, naq ur funyy fuhg vg hc frira qnlf zber:
13:55 Naq gur cevrfg funyy ybbx ba gur cynthr, nsgre gung vg vf
jnfurq: naq, orubyq, vs gur cynthr unir abg punatrq uvf pbybhe, naq
gur cynthr or abg fcernq; vg vf hapyrna; gubh funyg ohea vg va gur
sver; vg vf serg vajneq, jurgure vg or oner jvguva be jvgubhg.

13:56 Naq vs gur cevrfg ybbx, naq, orubyq, gur cynthr or fbzrjung qnex
nsgre gur jnfuvat bs vg; gura ur funyy eraq vg bhg bs gur tnezrag, be
bhg bs gur fxva, be bhg bs gur jnec, be bhg bs gur jbbs: 13:57 Naq vs
vg nccrne fgvyy va gur tnezrag, rvgure va gur jnec, be va gur jbbs, be
va nal guvat bs fxva; vg vf n fcernqvat cynthr: gubh funyg ohea gung
jurerva gur cynthr vf jvgu sver.

13:58 Naq gur tnezrag, rvgure jnec, be jbbs, be jungfbrire guvat bs
fxva vg or, juvpu gubh funyg jnfu, vs gur cynthr or qrcnegrq sebz
gurz, gura vg funyy or jnfurq gur frpbaq gvzr, naq funyy or pyrna.

13:59 Guvf vf gur ynj bs gur cynthr bs yrcebfl va n tnezrag bs jbbyyra
be yvara, rvgure va gur jnec, be jbbs, be nal guvat bs fxvaf, gb
cebabhapr vg pyrna, be gb cebabhapr vg hapyrna.

14:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 14:2 Guvf funyy or gur ynj
bs gur yrcre va gur qnl bs uvf pyrnafvat: Ur funyy or oebhtug hagb gur
cevrfg: 14:3 Naq gur cevrfg funyy tb sbegu bhg bs gur pnzc; naq gur
cevrfg funyy ybbx, naq, orubyq, vs gur cynthr bs yrcebfl or urnyrq va
gur yrcre; 14:4 Gura funyy gur cevrfg pbzznaq gb gnxr sbe uvz gung vf
gb or pyrnafrq gjb oveqf nyvir naq pyrna, naq prqne jbbq, naq fpneyrg,
naq ulffbc: 14:5 Naq gur cevrfg funyy pbzznaq gung bar bs gur oveqf or
xvyyrq va na rnegura irffry bire ehaavat jngre: 14:6 Nf sbe gur yvivat
oveq, ur funyy gnxr vg, naq gur prqne jbbq, naq gur fpneyrg, naq gur
ulffbc, naq funyy qvc gurz naq gur yvivat oveq va gur oybbq bs gur
oveq gung jnf xvyyrq bire gur ehaavat jngre: 14:7 Naq ur funyy
fcevaxyr hcba uvz gung vf gb or pyrnafrq sebz gur yrcebfl frira gvzrf,
naq funyy cebabhapr uvz pyrna, naq funyy yrg gur yvivat oveq ybbfr
vagb gur bcra svryq.

14:8 Naq ur gung vf gb or pyrnafrq funyy jnfu uvf pybgurf, naq funir
bss nyy uvf unve, naq jnfu uvzfrys va jngre, gung ur znl or pyrna: naq
nsgre gung ur funyy pbzr vagb gur pnzc, naq funyy gneel noebnq bhg bs
uvf grag frira qnlf.

14:9 Ohg vg funyy or ba gur friragu qnl, gung ur funyy funir nyy uvf
unve bss uvf urnq naq uvf orneq naq uvf rlroebjf, rira nyy uvf unve ur
funyy funir bss: naq ur funyy jnfu uvf pybgurf, nyfb ur funyy jnfu uvf
syrfu va jngre, naq ur funyy or pyrna.

14:10 Naq ba gur rvtugu qnl ur funyy gnxr gjb ur ynzof jvgubhg
oyrzvfu, naq bar rjr ynzo bs gur svefg lrne jvgubhg oyrzvfu, naq guerr
gragu qrnyf bs svar sybhe sbe n zrng bssrevat, zvatyrq jvgu bvy, naq
bar ybt bs bvy.

14:11 Naq gur cevrfg gung znxrgu uvz pyrna funyy cerfrag gur zna gung
vf gb or znqr pyrna, naq gubfr guvatf, orsber gur YBEQ, ng gur qbbe bs
gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba: 14:12 Naq gur cevrfg funyy gnxr
bar ur ynzo, naq bssre uvz sbe n gerfcnff bssrevat, naq gur ybt bs
bvy, naq jnir gurz sbe n jnir bssrevat orsber gur YBEQ: 14:13 Naq ur
funyy fynl gur ynzo va gur cynpr jurer ur funyy xvyy gur fva bssrevat
naq gur oheag bssrevat, va gur ubyl cynpr: sbe nf gur fva bssrevat vf
gur cevrfg'f, fb vf gur gerfcnff bssrevat: vg vf zbfg ubyl: 14:14 Naq
gur cevrfg funyy gnxr fbzr bs gur oybbq bs gur gerfcnff bssrevat, naq
gur cevrfg funyy chg vg hcba gur gvc bs gur evtug rne bs uvz gung vf
gb or pyrnafrq, naq hcba gur guhzo bs uvf evtug unaq, naq hcba gur
terng gbr bs uvf evtug sbbg: 14:15 Naq gur cevrfg funyy gnxr fbzr bs
gur ybt bs bvy, naq cbhe vg vagb gur cnyz bs uvf bja yrsg unaq: 14:16
Naq gur cevrfg funyy qvc uvf evtug svatre va gur bvy gung vf va uvf
yrsg unaq, naq funyy fcevaxyr bs gur bvy jvgu uvf svatre frira gvzrf
orsber gur YBEQ: 14:17 Naq bs gur erfg bs gur bvy gung vf va uvf unaq
funyy gur cevrfg chg hcba gur gvc bs gur evtug rne bs uvz gung vf gb
or pyrnafrq, naq hcba gur guhzo bs uvf evtug unaq, naq hcba gur terng
gbr bs uvf evtug sbbg, hcba gur oybbq bs gur gerfcnff bssrevat: 14:18
Naq gur erzanag bs gur bvy gung vf va gur cevrfg'f unaq ur funyy cbhe
hcba gur urnq bs uvz gung vf gb or pyrnafrq: naq gur cevrfg funyy znxr
na ngbarzrag sbe uvz orsber gur YBEQ.

14:19 Naq gur cevrfg funyy bssre gur fva bssrevat, naq znxr na
ngbarzrag sbe uvz gung vf gb or pyrnafrq sebz uvf hapyrnaarff; naq
nsgrejneq ur funyy xvyy gur oheag bssrevat: 14:20 Naq gur cevrfg funyy
bssre gur oheag bssrevat naq gur zrng bssrevat hcba gur nygne: naq gur
cevrfg funyy znxr na ngbarzrag sbe uvz, naq ur funyy or pyrna.

14:21 Naq vs ur or cbbe, naq pnaabg trg fb zhpu; gura ur funyy gnxr
bar ynzo sbe n gerfcnff bssrevat gb or jnirq, gb znxr na ngbarzrag sbe
uvz, naq bar gragu qrny bs svar sybhe zvatyrq jvgu bvy sbe n zrng
bssrevat, naq n ybt bs bvy; 14:22 Naq gjb ghegyrqbirf, be gjb lbhat
cvtrbaf, fhpu nf ur vf noyr gb trg; naq gur bar funyy or n fva
bssrevat, naq gur bgure n oheag bssrevat.

14:23 Naq ur funyy oevat gurz ba gur rvtugu qnl sbe uvf pyrnafvat hagb
gur cevrfg, hagb gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba,
orsber gur YBEQ.

14:24 Naq gur cevrfg funyy gnxr gur ynzo bs gur gerfcnff bssrevat, naq
gur ybt bs bvy, naq gur cevrfg funyy jnir gurz sbe n jnir bssrevat
orsber gur YBEQ: 14:25 Naq ur funyy xvyy gur ynzo bs gur gerfcnff
bssrevat, naq gur cevrfg funyy gnxr fbzr bs gur oybbq bs gur gerfcnff
bssrevat, naq chg vg hcba gur gvc bs gur evtug rne bs uvz gung vf gb
or pyrnafrq, naq hcba gur guhzo bs uvf evtug unaq, naq hcba gur terng
gbr bs uvf evtug sbbg: 14:26 Naq gur cevrfg funyy cbhe bs gur bvy vagb
gur cnyz bs uvf bja yrsg unaq: 14:27 Naq gur cevrfg funyy fcevaxyr
jvgu uvf evtug svatre fbzr bs gur bvy gung vf va uvf yrsg unaq frira
gvzrf orsber gur YBEQ: 14:28 Naq gur cevrfg funyy chg bs gur bvy gung
vf va uvf unaq hcba gur gvc bs gur evtug rne bs uvz gung vf gb or
pyrnafrq, naq hcba gur guhzo bs uvf evtug unaq, naq hcba gur terng gbr
bs uvf evtug sbbg, hcba gur cynpr bs gur oybbq bs gur gerfcnff
bssrevat: 14:29 Naq gur erfg bs gur bvy gung vf va gur cevrfg'f unaq
ur funyy chg hcba gur urnq bs uvz gung vf gb or pyrnafrq, gb znxr na
ngbarzrag sbe uvz orsber gur YBEQ.

14:30 Naq ur funyy bssre gur bar bs gur ghegyrqbirf, be bs gur lbhat
cvtrbaf, fhpu nf ur pna trg; 14:31 Rira fhpu nf ur vf noyr gb trg, gur
bar sbe n fva bssrevat, naq gur bgure sbe n oheag bssrevat, jvgu gur
zrng bssrevat: naq gur cevrfg funyy znxr na ngbarzrag sbe uvz gung vf
gb or pyrnafrq orsber gur YBEQ.

14:32 Guvf vf gur ynj bs uvz va jubz vf gur cynthr bs yrcebfl, jubfr
unaq vf abg noyr gb trg gung juvpu cregnvargu gb uvf pyrnafvat.

14:33 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf naq hagb Nneba, fnlvat, 14:34 Jura
lr or pbzr vagb gur ynaq bs Pnanna, juvpu V tvir gb lbh sbe n
cbffrffvba, naq V chg gur cynthr bs yrcebfl va n ubhfr bs gur ynaq bs
lbhe cbffrffvba; 14:35 Naq ur gung bjargu gur ubhfr funyy pbzr naq
gryy gur cevrfg, fnlvat, Vg frrzrgu gb zr gurer vf nf vg jrer n cynthr
va gur ubhfr: 14:36 Gura gur cevrfg funyy pbzznaq gung gurl rzcgl gur
ubhfr, orsber gur cevrfg tb vagb vg gb frr gur cynthr, gung nyy gung
vf va gur ubhfr or abg znqr hapyrna: naq nsgrejneq gur cevrfg funyy tb
va gb frr gur ubhfr: 14:37 Naq ur funyy ybbx ba gur cynthr, naq,
orubyq, vs gur cynthr or va gur jnyyf bs gur ubhfr jvgu ubyybj
fgenxrf, terravfu be erqqvfu, juvpu va fvtug ner ybjre guna gur jnyy;
14:38 Gura gur cevrfg funyy tb bhg bs gur ubhfr gb gur qbbe bs gur
ubhfr, naq fuhg hc gur ubhfr frira qnlf: 14:39 Naq gur cevrfg funyy
pbzr ntnva gur friragu qnl, naq funyy ybbx: naq, orubyq, vs gur cynthr
or fcernq va gur jnyyf bs gur ubhfr; 14:40 Gura gur cevrfg funyy
pbzznaq gung gurl gnxr njnl gur fgbarf va juvpu gur cynthr vf, naq
gurl funyy pnfg gurz vagb na hapyrna cynpr jvgubhg gur pvgl: 14:41 Naq
ur funyy pnhfr gur ubhfr gb or fpencrq jvguva ebhaq nobhg, naq gurl
funyy cbhe bhg gur qhfg gung gurl fpencr bss jvgubhg gur pvgl vagb na
hapyrna cynpr: 14:42 Naq gurl funyy gnxr bgure fgbarf, naq chg gurz va
gur cynpr bs gubfr fgbarf; naq ur funyy gnxr bgure zbegre, naq funyy
cynvfgre gur ubhfr.

14:43 Naq vs gur cynthr pbzr ntnva, naq oernx bhg va gur ubhfr, nsgre
gung ur ungu gnxra njnl gur fgbarf, naq nsgre ur ungu fpencrq gur
ubhfr, naq nsgre vg vf cynvfgrerq; 14:44 Gura gur cevrfg funyy pbzr
naq ybbx, naq, orubyq, vs gur cynthr or fcernq va gur ubhfr, vg vf n
serggvat yrcebfl va gur ubhfr; vg vf hapyrna.

14:45 Naq ur funyy oernx qbja gur ubhfr, gur fgbarf bs vg, naq gur
gvzore gurerbs, naq nyy gur zbegre bs gur ubhfr; naq ur funyy pneel
gurz sbegu bhg bs gur pvgl vagb na hapyrna cynpr.

14:46 Zberbire ur gung tbrgu vagb gur ubhfr nyy gur juvyr gung vg vf
fuhg hc funyy or hapyrna hagvy gur rira.

14:47 Naq ur gung yvrgu va gur ubhfr funyy jnfu uvf pybgurf; naq ur
gung rngrgu va gur ubhfr funyy jnfu uvf pybgurf.

14:48 Naq vs gur cevrfg funyy pbzr va, naq ybbx hcba vg, naq, orubyq,
gur cynthr ungu abg fcernq va gur ubhfr, nsgre gur ubhfr jnf
cynvfgrerq: gura gur cevrfg funyy cebabhapr gur ubhfr pyrna, orpnhfr
gur cynthr vf urnyrq.

14:49 Naq ur funyy gnxr gb pyrnafr gur ubhfr gjb oveqf, naq prqne
jbbq, naq fpneyrg, naq ulffbc: 14:50 Naq ur funyy xvyy gur bar bs gur
oveqf va na rnegura irffry bire ehaavat jngre: 14:51 Naq ur funyy gnxr
gur prqne jbbq, naq gur ulffbc, naq gur fpneyrg, naq gur yvivat oveq,
naq qvc gurz va gur oybbq bs gur fynva oveq, naq va gur ehaavat jngre,
naq fcevaxyr gur ubhfr frira gvzrf: 14:52 Naq ur funyy pyrnafr gur
ubhfr jvgu gur oybbq bs gur oveq, naq jvgu gur ehaavat jngre, naq jvgu
gur yvivat oveq, naq jvgu gur prqne jbbq, naq jvgu gur ulffbc, naq
jvgu gur fpneyrg: 14:53 Ohg ur funyy yrg tb gur yvivat oveq bhg bs gur
pvgl vagb gur bcra svryqf, naq znxr na ngbarzrag sbe gur ubhfr: naq vg
funyy or pyrna.

14:54 Guvf vf gur ynj sbe nyy znaare bs cynthr bs yrcebfl, naq fpnyy,
14:55 Naq sbe gur yrcebfl bs n tnezrag, naq bs n ubhfr, 14:56 Naq sbe
n evfvat, naq sbe n fpno, naq sbe n oevtug fcbg: 14:57 Gb grnpu jura
vg vf hapyrna, naq jura vg vf pyrna: guvf vf gur ynj bs yrcebfl.

15:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf naq gb Nneba, fnlvat, 15:2 Fcrnx
hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq fnl hagb gurz, Jura nal zna ungu n
ehaavat vffhr bhg bs uvf syrfu, orpnhfr bs uvf vffhr ur vf hapyrna.

15:3 Naq guvf funyy or uvf hapyrnaarff va uvf vffhr: jurgure uvf syrfu
eha jvgu uvf vffhr, be uvf syrfu or fgbccrq sebz uvf vffhr, vg vf uvf
hapyrnaarff.

15:4 Rirel orq, jurerba ur yvrgu gung ungu gur vffhr, vf hapyrna: naq
rirel guvat, jurerba ur fvggrgu, funyy or hapyrna.

15:5 Naq jubfbrire gbhpurgu uvf orq funyy jnfu uvf pybgurf, naq ongur
uvzfrys va jngre, naq or hapyrna hagvy gur rira.

15:6 Naq ur gung fvggrgu ba nal guvat jurerba ur fng gung ungu gur
vffhr funyy jnfu uvf pybgurf, naq ongur uvzfrys va jngre, naq or
hapyrna hagvy gur rira.

15:7 Naq ur gung gbhpurgu gur syrfu bs uvz gung ungu gur vffhr funyy
jnfu uvf pybgurf, naq ongur uvzfrys va jngre, naq or hapyrna hagvy gur
rira.

15:8 Naq vs ur gung ungu gur vffhr fcvg hcba uvz gung vf pyrna; gura
ur funyy jnfu uvf pybgurf, naq ongur uvzfrys va jngre, naq or hapyrna
hagvy gur rira.

15:9 Naq jung fnqqyr fbrire ur evqrgu hcba gung ungu gur vffhr funyy
or hapyrna.

15:10 Naq jubfbrire gbhpurgu nal guvat gung jnf haqre uvz funyy or
hapyrna hagvy gur rira: naq ur gung ornergu nal bs gubfr guvatf funyy
jnfu uvf pybgurf, naq ongur uvzfrys va jngre, naq or hapyrna hagvy gur
rira.

15:11 Naq jubzfbrire ur gbhpurgu gung ungu gur vffhr, naq ungu abg
evafrq uvf unaqf va jngre, ur funyy jnfu uvf pybgurf, naq ongur
uvzfrys va jngre, naq or hapyrna hagvy gur rira.

15:12 Naq gur irffry bs rnegu, gung ur gbhpurgu juvpu ungu gur vffhr,
funyy or oebxra: naq rirel irffry bs jbbq funyy or evafrq va jngre.

15:13 Naq jura ur gung ungu na vffhr vf pyrnafrq bs uvf vffhr; gura ur
funyy ahzore gb uvzfrys frira qnlf sbe uvf pyrnafvat, naq jnfu uvf
pybgurf, naq ongur uvf syrfu va ehaavat jngre, naq funyy or pyrna.

15:14 Naq ba gur rvtugu qnl ur funyy gnxr gb uvz gjb ghegyrqbirf, be
gjb lbhat cvtrbaf, naq pbzr orsber gur YBEQ hagb gur qbbe bs gur
gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, naq tvir gurz hagb gur cevrfg: 15:15
Naq gur cevrfg funyy bssre gurz, gur bar sbe n fva bssrevat, naq gur
bgure sbe n oheag bssrevat; naq gur cevrfg funyy znxr na ngbarzrag sbe
uvz orsber gur YBEQ sbe uvf vffhr.

15:16 Naq vs nal zna'f frrq bs pbchyngvba tb bhg sebz uvz, gura ur
funyy jnfu nyy uvf syrfu va jngre, naq or hapyrna hagvy gur rira.

15:17 Naq rirel tnezrag, naq rirel fxva, jurerba vf gur frrq bs
pbchyngvba, funyy or jnfurq jvgu jngre, naq or hapyrna hagvy gur rira.

15:18 Gur jbzna nyfb jvgu jubz zna funyy yvr jvgu frrq bs pbchyngvba,
gurl funyy obgu ongur gurzfryirf va jngre, naq or hapyrna hagvy gur
rira.

15:19 Naq vs n jbzna unir na vffhr, naq ure vffhr va ure syrfu or
oybbq, fur funyy or chg ncneg frira qnlf: naq jubfbrire gbhpurgu ure
funyy or hapyrna hagvy gur rira.

15:20 Naq rirel guvat gung fur yvrgu hcba va ure frcnengvba funyy or
hapyrna: rirel guvat nyfb gung fur fvggrgu hcba funyy or hapyrna.

15:21 Naq jubfbrire gbhpurgu ure orq funyy jnfu uvf pybgurf, naq ongur
uvzfrys va jngre, naq or hapyrna hagvy gur rira.

15:22 Naq jubfbrire gbhpurgu nal guvat gung fur fng hcba funyy jnfu
uvf pybgurf, naq ongur uvzfrys va jngre, naq or hapyrna hagvy gur
rira.

15:23 Naq vs vg or ba ure orq, be ba nal guvat jurerba fur fvggrgu,
jura ur gbhpurgu vg, ur funyy or hapyrna hagvy gur rira.

15:24 Naq vs nal zna yvr jvgu ure ng nyy, naq ure sybjref or hcba uvz,
ur funyy or hapyrna frira qnlf; naq nyy gur orq jurerba ur yvrgu funyy
or hapyrna.

15:25 Naq vs n jbzna unir na vffhr bs ure oybbq znal qnlf bhg bs gur
gvzr bs ure frcnengvba, be vs vg eha orlbaq gur gvzr bs ure
frcnengvba; nyy gur qnlf bs gur vffhr bs ure hapyrnaarff funyy or nf
gur qnlf bs ure frcnengvba: fur funyy or hapyrna.

15:26 Rirel orq jurerba fur yvrgu nyy gur qnlf bs ure vffhr funyy or
hagb ure nf gur orq bs ure frcnengvba: naq jungfbrire fur fvggrgu hcba
funyy or hapyrna, nf gur hapyrnaarff bs ure frcnengvba.

15:27 Naq jubfbrire gbhpurgu gubfr guvatf funyy or hapyrna, naq funyy
jnfu uvf pybgurf, naq ongur uvzfrys va jngre, naq or hapyrna hagvy gur
rira.

15:28 Ohg vs fur or pyrnafrq bs ure vffhr, gura fur funyy ahzore gb
urefrys frira qnlf, naq nsgre gung fur funyy or pyrna.

15:29 Naq ba gur rvtugu qnl fur funyy gnxr hagb ure gjb ghegyrf, be
gjb lbhat cvtrbaf, naq oevat gurz hagb gur cevrfg, gb gur qbbe bs gur
gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba.

15:30 Naq gur cevrfg funyy bssre gur bar sbe n fva bssrevat, naq gur
bgure sbe n oheag bssrevat; naq gur cevrfg funyy znxr na ngbarzrag sbe
ure orsber gur YBEQ sbe gur vffhr bs ure hapyrnaarff.

15:31 Guhf funyy lr frcnengr gur puvyqera bs Vfenry sebz gurve
hapyrnaarff; gung gurl qvr abg va gurve hapyrnaarff, jura gurl qrsvyr
zl gnoreanpyr gung vf nzbat gurz.

15:32 Guvf vf gur ynj bs uvz gung ungu na vffhr, naq bs uvz jubfr frrq
tbrgu sebz uvz, naq vf qrsvyrq gurerjvgu; 15:33 Naq bs ure gung vf
fvpx bs ure sybjref, naq bs uvz gung ungu na vffhr, bs gur zna, naq bs
gur jbzna, naq bs uvz gung yvrgu jvgu ure gung vf hapyrna.

16:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf nsgre gur qrngu bs gur gjb fbaf bs
Nneba, jura gurl bssrerq orsber gur YBEQ, naq qvrq; 16:2 Naq gur YBEQ
fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Fcrnx hagb Nneba gul oebgure, gung ur pbzr abg ng nyy
gvzrf vagb gur ubyl cynpr jvguva gur invy orsber gur zrepl frng, juvpu
vf hcba gur nex; gung ur qvr abg: sbe V jvyy nccrne va gur pybhq hcba
gur zrepl frng.

16:3 Guhf funyy Nneba pbzr vagb gur ubyl cynpr: jvgu n lbhat ohyybpx
sbe n fva bssrevat, naq n enz sbe n oheag bssrevat.

16:4 Ur funyy chg ba gur ubyl yvara pbng, naq ur funyy unir gur yvara
oerrpurf hcba uvf syrfu, naq funyy or tveqrq jvgu n yvara tveqyr, naq
jvgu gur yvara zvger funyy ur or nggverq: gurfr ner ubyl tnezragf;
gurersber funyy ur jnfu uvf syrfu va jngre, naq fb chg gurz ba.

16:5 Naq ur funyy gnxr bs gur pbatertngvba bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry
gjb xvqf bs gur tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat, naq bar enz sbe n oheag
bssrevat.

16:6 Naq Nneba funyy bssre uvf ohyybpx bs gur fva bssrevat, juvpu vf
sbe uvzfrys, naq znxr na ngbarzrag sbe uvzfrys, naq sbe uvf ubhfr.

16:7 Naq ur funyy gnxr gur gjb tbngf, naq cerfrag gurz orsber gur YBEQ
ng gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba.

16:8 Naq Nneba funyy pnfg ybgf hcba gur gjb tbngf; bar ybg sbe gur
YBEQ, naq gur bgure ybg sbe gur fpncrtbng.

16:9 Naq Nneba funyy oevat gur tbng hcba juvpu gur YBEQ'f ybg sryy,
naq bssre uvz sbe n fva bssrevat.

16:10 Ohg gur tbng, ba juvpu gur ybg sryy gb or gur fpncrtbng, funyy
or cerfragrq nyvir orsber gur YBEQ, gb znxr na ngbarzrag jvgu uvz, naq
gb yrg uvz tb sbe n fpncrtbng vagb gur jvyqrearff.

16:11 Naq Nneba funyy oevat gur ohyybpx bs gur fva bssrevat, juvpu vf
sbe uvzfrys, naq funyy znxr na ngbarzrag sbe uvzfrys, naq sbe uvf
ubhfr, naq funyy xvyy gur ohyybpx bs gur fva bssrevat juvpu vf sbe
uvzfrys: 16:12 Naq ur funyy gnxr n prafre shyy bs oheavat pbnyf bs
sver sebz bss gur nygne orsber gur YBEQ, naq uvf unaqf shyy bs fjrrg
vaprafr orngra fznyy, naq oevat vg jvguva gur invy: 16:13 Naq ur funyy
chg gur vaprafr hcba gur sver orsber gur YBEQ, gung gur pybhq bs gur
vaprafr znl pbire gur zrepl frng gung vf hcba gur grfgvzbal, gung ur
qvr abg: 16:14 Naq ur funyy gnxr bs gur oybbq bs gur ohyybpx, naq
fcevaxyr vg jvgu uvf svatre hcba gur zrepl frng rnfgjneq; naq orsber
gur zrepl frng funyy ur fcevaxyr bs gur oybbq jvgu uvf svatre frira
gvzrf.

16:15 Gura funyy ur xvyy gur tbng bs gur fva bssrevat, gung vf sbe gur
crbcyr, naq oevat uvf oybbq jvguva gur invy, naq qb jvgu gung oybbq nf
ur qvq jvgu gur oybbq bs gur ohyybpx, naq fcevaxyr vg hcba gur zrepl
frng, naq orsber gur zrepl frng: 16:16 Naq ur funyy znxr na ngbarzrag
sbe gur ubyl cynpr, orpnhfr bs gur hapyrnaarff bs gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, naq orpnhfr bs gurve genafterffvbaf va nyy gurve fvaf: naq fb
funyy ur qb sbe gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, gung erznvargu
nzbat gurz va gur zvqfg bs gurve hapyrnaarff.

16:17 Naq gurer funyy or ab zna va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba
jura ur tbrgu va gb znxr na ngbarzrag va gur ubyl cynpr, hagvy ur pbzr
bhg, naq unir znqr na ngbarzrag sbe uvzfrys, naq sbe uvf ubhfrubyq,
naq sbe nyy gur pbatertngvba bs Vfenry.

16:18 Naq ur funyy tb bhg hagb gur nygne gung vf orsber gur YBEQ, naq
znxr na ngbarzrag sbe vg; naq funyy gnxr bs gur oybbq bs gur ohyybpx,
naq bs gur oybbq bs gur tbng, naq chg vg hcba gur ubeaf bs gur nygne
ebhaq nobhg.

16:19 Naq ur funyy fcevaxyr bs gur oybbq hcba vg jvgu uvf svatre frira
gvzrf, naq pyrnafr vg, naq unyybj vg sebz gur hapyrnaarff bs gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry.

16:20 Naq jura ur ungu znqr na raq bs erpbapvyvat gur ubyl cynpr, naq
gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, naq gur nygne, ur funyy oevat gur
yvir tbng: 16:21 Naq Nneba funyy ynl obgu uvf unaqf hcba gur urnq bs
gur yvir tbng, naq pbasrff bire uvz nyy gur vavdhvgvrf bs gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry, naq nyy gurve genafterffvbaf va nyy gurve fvaf, chggvat
gurz hcba gur urnq bs gur tbng, naq funyy fraq uvz njnl ol gur unaq bs
n svg zna vagb gur jvyqrearff: 16:22 Naq gur tbng funyy orne hcba uvz
nyy gurve vavdhvgvrf hagb n ynaq abg vaunovgrq: naq ur funyy yrg tb
gur tbng va gur jvyqrearff.

16:23 Naq Nneba funyy pbzr vagb gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba,
naq funyy chg bss gur yvara tnezragf, juvpu ur chg ba jura ur jrag
vagb gur ubyl cynpr, naq funyy yrnir gurz gurer: 16:24 Naq ur funyy
jnfu uvf syrfu jvgu jngre va gur ubyl cynpr, naq chg ba uvf tnezragf,
naq pbzr sbegu, naq bssre uvf oheag bssrevat, naq gur oheag bssrevat
bs gur crbcyr, naq znxr na ngbarzrag sbe uvzfrys, naq sbe gur crbcyr.

16:25 Naq gur sng bs gur fva bssrevat funyy ur ohea hcba gur nygne.

16:26 Naq ur gung yrg tb gur tbng sbe gur fpncrtbng funyy jnfu uvf
pybgurf, naq ongur uvf syrfu va jngre, naq nsgrejneq pbzr vagb gur
pnzc.

16:27 Naq gur ohyybpx sbe gur fva bssrevat, naq gur tbng sbe gur fva
bssrevat, jubfr oybbq jnf oebhtug va gb znxr ngbarzrag va gur ubyl
cynpr, funyy bar pneel sbegu jvgubhg gur pnzc; naq gurl funyy ohea va
gur sver gurve fxvaf, naq gurve syrfu, naq gurve qhat.

16:28 Naq ur gung oheargu gurz funyy jnfu uvf pybgurf, naq ongur uvf
syrfu va jngre, naq nsgrejneq ur funyy pbzr vagb gur pnzc.

16:29 Naq guvf funyy or n fgnghgr sbe rire hagb lbh: gung va gur
friragu zbagu, ba gur gragu qnl bs gur zbagu, lr funyy nssyvpg lbhe
fbhyf, naq qb ab jbex ng nyy, jurgure vg or bar bs lbhe bja pbhagel,
be n fgenatre gung fbwbheargu nzbat lbh: 16:30 Sbe ba gung qnl funyy
gur cevrfg znxr na ngbarzrag sbe lbh, gb pyrnafr lbh, gung lr znl or
pyrna sebz nyy lbhe fvaf orsber gur YBEQ.

16:31 Vg funyy or n fnoongu bs erfg hagb lbh, naq lr funyy nssyvpg
lbhe fbhyf, ol n fgnghgr sbe rire.

16:32 Naq gur cevrfg, jubz ur funyy nabvag, naq jubz ur funyy
pbafrpengr gb zvavfgre va gur cevrfg'f bssvpr va uvf sngure'f fgrnq,
funyy znxr gur ngbarzrag, naq funyy chg ba gur yvara pybgurf, rira gur
ubyl tnezragf: 16:33 Naq ur funyy znxr na ngbarzrag sbe gur ubyl
fnapghnel, naq ur funyy znxr na ngbarzrag sbe gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba, naq sbe gur nygne, naq ur funyy znxr na ngbarzrag sbe
gur cevrfgf, naq sbe nyy gur crbcyr bs gur pbatertngvba.

16:34 Naq guvf funyy or na rireynfgvat fgnghgr hagb lbh, gb znxr na
ngbarzrag sbe gur puvyqera bs Vfenry sbe nyy gurve fvaf bapr n lrne.
Naq ur qvq nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

17:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 17:2 Fcrnx hagb Nneba, naq
hagb uvf fbaf, naq hagb nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq fnl hagb gurz;
Guvf vf gur guvat juvpu gur YBEQ ungu pbzznaqrq, fnlvat, 17:3 Jung zna
fbrire gurer or bs gur ubhfr bs Vfenry, gung xvyyrgu na bk, be ynzo,
be tbng, va gur pnzc, be gung xvyyrgu vg bhg bs gur pnzc, 17:4 Naq
oevatrgu vg abg hagb gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba,
gb bssre na bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ orsber gur gnoreanpyr bs gur YBEQ;
oybbq funyy or vzchgrq hagb gung zna; ur ungu furq oybbq; naq gung zna
funyy or phg bss sebz nzbat uvf crbcyr: 17:5 Gb gur raq gung gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry znl oevat gurve fnpevsvprf, juvpu gurl bssre va gur
bcra svryq, rira gung gurl znl oevat gurz hagb gur YBEQ, hagb gur qbbe
bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, hagb gur cevrfg, naq bssre gurz
sbe crnpr bssrevatf hagb gur YBEQ.

17:6 Naq gur cevrfg funyy fcevaxyr gur oybbq hcba gur nygne bs gur
YBEQ ng gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, naq ohea gur
sng sbe n fjrrg fnibhe hagb gur YBEQ.

17:7 Naq gurl funyy ab zber bssre gurve fnpevsvprf hagb qrivyf, nsgre
jubz gurl unir tbar n jubevat. Guvf funyy or n fgnghgr sbe rire hagb
gurz guebhtubhg gurve trarengvbaf.

17:8 Naq gubh funyg fnl hagb gurz, Jungfbrire zna gurer or bs gur
ubhfr bs Vfenry, be bs gur fgenatref juvpu fbwbhea nzbat lbh, gung
bssrergu n oheag bssrevat be fnpevsvpr, 17:9 Naq oevatrgu vg abg hagb
gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, gb bssre vg hagb gur
YBEQ; rira gung zna funyy or phg bss sebz nzbat uvf crbcyr.

17:10 Naq jungfbrire zna gurer or bs gur ubhfr bs Vfenry, be bs gur
fgenatref gung fbwbhea nzbat lbh, gung rngrgu nal znaare bs oybbq; V
jvyy rira frg zl snpr ntnvafg gung fbhy gung rngrgu oybbq, naq jvyy
phg uvz bss sebz nzbat uvf crbcyr.

17:11 Sbe gur yvsr bs gur syrfu vf va gur oybbq: naq V unir tvira vg
gb lbh hcba gur nygne gb znxr na ngbarzrag sbe lbhe fbhyf: sbe vg vf
gur oybbq gung znxrgu na ngbarzrag sbe gur fbhy.

17:12 Gurersber V fnvq hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, Ab fbhy bs lbh
funyy rng oybbq, arvgure funyy nal fgenatre gung fbwbheargu nzbat lbh
rng oybbq.

17:13 Naq jungfbrire zna gurer or bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, be bs gur
fgenatref gung fbwbhea nzbat lbh, juvpu uhagrgu naq pngpurgu nal ornfg
be sbjy gung znl or rngra; ur funyy rira cbhe bhg gur oybbq gurerbs,
naq pbire vg jvgu qhfg.

17:14 Sbe vg vf gur yvsr bs nyy syrfu; gur oybbq bs vg vf sbe gur yvsr
gurerbs: gurersber V fnvq hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, Lr funyy rng
gur oybbq bs ab znaare bs syrfu: sbe gur yvsr bs nyy syrfu vf gur
oybbq gurerbs: jubfbrire rngrgu vg funyy or phg bss.

17:15 Naq rirel fbhy gung rngrgu gung juvpu qvrq bs vgfrys, be gung
juvpu jnf gbea jvgu ornfgf, jurgure vg or bar bs lbhe bja pbhagel, be
n fgenatre, ur funyy obgu jnfu uvf pybgurf, naq ongur uvzfrys va
jngre, naq or hapyrna hagvy gur rira: gura funyy ur or pyrna.

17:16 Ohg vs ur jnfu gurz abg, abe ongur uvf syrfu; gura ur funyy orne
uvf vavdhvgl.

18:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 18:2 Fcrnx hagb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq fnl hagb gurz, V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

18:3 Nsgre gur qbvatf bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, jurerva lr qjryg, funyy lr
abg qb: naq nsgre gur qbvatf bs gur ynaq bs Pnanna, juvgure V oevat
lbh, funyy lr abg qb: arvgure funyy lr jnyx va gurve beqvanaprf.

18:4 Lr funyy qb zl whqtzragf, naq xrrc zvar beqvanaprf, gb jnyx
gurerva: V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

18:5 Lr funyy gurersber xrrc zl fgnghgrf, naq zl whqtzragf: juvpu vs n
zna qb, ur funyy yvir va gurz: V nz gur YBEQ.

18:6 Abar bs lbh funyy nccebnpu gb nal gung vf arne bs xva gb uvz, gb
hapbire gurve anxrqarff: V nz gur YBEQ.

18:7 Gur anxrqarff bs gul sngure, be gur anxrqarff bs gul zbgure,
funyg gubh abg hapbire: fur vf gul zbgure; gubh funyg abg hapbire ure
anxrqarff.

18:8 Gur anxrqarff bs gul sngure'f jvsr funyg gubh abg hapbire: vg vf
gul sngure'f anxrqarff.

18:9 Gur anxrqarff bs gul fvfgre, gur qnhtugre bs gul sngure, be
qnhtugre bs gul zbgure, jurgure fur or obea ng ubzr, be obea noebnq,
rira gurve anxrqarff gubh funyg abg hapbire.

18:10 Gur anxrqarff bs gul fba'f qnhtugre, be bs gul qnhtugre'f
qnhtugre, rira gurve anxrqarff gubh funyg abg hapbire: sbe gurvef vf
guvar bja anxrqarff.

18:11 Gur anxrqarff bs gul sngure'f jvsr'f qnhtugre, ortbggra bs gul
sngure, fur vf gul fvfgre, gubh funyg abg hapbire ure anxrqarff.

18:12 Gubh funyg abg hapbire gur anxrqarff bs gul sngure'f fvfgre: fur
vf gul sngure'f arne xvafjbzna.

18:13 Gubh funyg abg hapbire gur anxrqarff bs gul zbgure'f fvfgre: sbe
fur vf gul zbgure'f arne xvafjbzna.

18:14 Gubh funyg abg hapbire gur anxrqarff bs gul sngure'f oebgure,
gubh funyg abg nccebnpu gb uvf jvsr: fur vf guvar nhag.

18:15 Gubh funyg abg hapbire gur anxrqarff bs gul qnhtugre va ynj: fur
vf gul fba'f jvsr; gubh funyg abg hapbire ure anxrqarff.

18:16 Gubh funyg abg hapbire gur anxrqarff bs gul oebgure'f jvsr: vg
vf gul oebgure'f anxrqarff.

18:17 Gubh funyg abg hapbire gur anxrqarff bs n jbzna naq ure
qnhtugre, arvgure funyg gubh gnxr ure fba'f qnhtugre, be ure
qnhtugre'f qnhtugre, gb hapbire ure anxrqarff; sbe gurl ner ure arne
xvafjbzra: vg vf jvpxrqarff.

18:18 Arvgure funyg gubh gnxr n jvsr gb ure fvfgre, gb irk ure, gb
hapbire ure anxrqarff, orfvqr gur bgure va ure yvsr gvzr.

18:19 Nyfb gubh funyg abg nccebnpu hagb n jbzna gb hapbire ure
anxrqarff, nf ybat nf fur vf chg ncneg sbe ure hapyrnaarff.

18:20 Zberbire gubh funyg abg yvr pneanyyl jvgu gul arvtuobhe'f jvsr,
gb qrsvyr gulfrys jvgu ure.

18:21 Naq gubh funyg abg yrg nal bs gul frrq cnff guebhtu gur sver gb
Zbyrpu, arvgure funyg gubh cebsnar gur anzr bs gul Tbq: V nz gur YBEQ.

18:22 Gubh funyg abg yvr jvgu znaxvaq, nf jvgu jbznaxvaq: vg vf
nobzvangvba.

18:23 Arvgure funyg gubh yvr jvgu nal ornfg gb qrsvyr gulfrys
gurerjvgu: arvgure funyy nal jbzna fgnaq orsber n ornfg gb yvr qbja
gurergb: vg vf pbashfvba.

18:24 Qrsvyr abg lr lbhefryirf va nal bs gurfr guvatf: sbe va nyy
gurfr gur angvbaf ner qrsvyrq juvpu V pnfg bhg orsber lbh: 18:25 Naq
gur ynaq vf qrsvyrq: gurersber V qb ivfvg gur vavdhvgl gurerbs hcba
vg, naq gur ynaq vgfrys ibzvgrgu bhg ure vaunovgnagf.

18:26 Lr funyy gurersber xrrc zl fgnghgrf naq zl whqtzragf, naq funyy
abg pbzzvg nal bs gurfr nobzvangvbaf; arvgure nal bs lbhe bja angvba,
abe nal fgenatre gung fbwbheargu nzbat lbh: 18:27 (Sbe nyy gurfr
nobzvangvbaf unir gur zra bs gur ynaq qbar, juvpu jrer orsber lbh, naq
gur ynaq vf qrsvyrq;) 18:28 Gung gur ynaq fchr abg lbh bhg nyfb, jura
lr qrsvyr vg, nf vg fchrq bhg gur angvbaf gung jrer orsber lbh.

18:29 Sbe jubfbrire funyy pbzzvg nal bs gurfr nobzvangvbaf, rira gur
fbhyf gung pbzzvg gurz funyy or phg bss sebz nzbat gurve crbcyr.

18:30 Gurersber funyy lr xrrc zvar beqvanapr, gung lr pbzzvg abg nal
bar bs gurfr nobzvanoyr phfgbzf, juvpu jrer pbzzvggrq orsber lbh, naq
gung lr qrsvyr abg lbhefryirf gurerva: V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

19:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 19:2 Fcrnx hagb nyy gur
pbatertngvba bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq fnl hagb gurz, Lr funyy or
ubyl: sbe V gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq nz ubyl.

19:3 Lr funyy srne rirel zna uvf zbgure, naq uvf sngure, naq xrrc zl
fnoonguf: V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

19:4 Ghea lr abg hagb vqbyf, abe znxr gb lbhefryirf zbygra tbqf: V nz
gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

19:5 Naq vs lr bssre n fnpevsvpr bs crnpr bssrevatf hagb gur YBEQ, lr
funyy bssre vg ng lbhe bja jvyy.

19:6 Vg funyy or rngra gur fnzr qnl lr bssre vg, naq ba gur zbeebj:
naq vs bhtug erznva hagvy gur guveq qnl, vg funyy or oheag va gur
sver.

19:7 Naq vs vg or rngra ng nyy ba gur guveq qnl, vg vf nobzvanoyr; vg
funyy abg or npprcgrq.

19:8 Gurersber rirel bar gung rngrgu vg funyy orne uvf vavdhvgl,
orpnhfr ur ungu cebsnarq gur unyybjrq guvat bs gur YBEQ: naq gung fbhy
funyy or phg bss sebz nzbat uvf crbcyr.

19:9 Naq jura lr ernc gur uneirfg bs lbhe ynaq, gubh funyg abg jubyyl
ernc gur pbearef bs gul svryq, arvgure funyg gubh tngure gur tyrnavatf
bs gul uneirfg.

19:10 Naq gubh funyg abg tyrna gul ivarlneq, arvgure funyg gubh tngure
rirel tencr bs gul ivarlneq; gubh funyg yrnir gurz sbe gur cbbe naq
fgenatre: V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

19:11 Lr funyy abg fgrny, arvgure qrny snyfryl, arvgure yvr bar gb
nabgure.

19:12 Naq lr funyy abg fjrne ol zl anzr snyfryl, arvgure funyg gubh
cebsnar gur anzr bs gul Tbq: V nz gur YBEQ.

19:13 Gubh funyg abg qrsenhq gul arvtuobhe, arvgure ebo uvz: gur jntrf
bs uvz gung vf uverq funyy abg novqr jvgu gurr nyy avtug hagvy gur
zbeavat.

19:14 Gubh funyg abg phefr gur qrns, abe chg n fghzoyvatoybpx orsber
gur oyvaq, ohg funyg srne gul Tbq: V nz gur YBEQ.

19:15 Lr funyy qb ab haevtugrbhfarff va whqtzrag: gubh funyg abg
erfcrpg gur crefba bs gur cbbe, abe ubabe gur crefba bs gur zvtugl:
ohg va evtugrbhfarff funyg gubh whqtr gul arvtuobhe.

19:16 Gubh funyg abg tb hc naq qbja nf n gnyrornere nzbat gul crbcyr:
arvgure funyg gubh fgnaq ntnvafg gur oybbq bs gul arvtuobhe; V nz gur
YBEQ.

19:17 Gubh funyg abg ungr gul oebgure va guvar urneg: gubh funyg va
nal jvfr erohxr gul arvtuobhe, naq abg fhssre fva hcba uvz.

19:18 Gubh funyg abg niratr, abe orne nal tehqtr ntnvafg gur puvyqera
bs gul crbcyr, ohg gubh funyg ybir gul arvtuobhe nf gulfrys: V nz gur
YBEQ.

19:19 Lr funyy xrrc zl fgnghgrf. Gubh funyg abg yrg gul pnggyr traqre
jvgu n qvirefr xvaq: gubh funyg abg fbj gul svryq jvgu zvatyrq frrq:
arvgure funyy n tnezrag zvatyrq bs yvara naq jbbyyra pbzr hcba gurr.

19:20 Naq jubfbrire yvrgu pneanyyl jvgu n jbzna, gung vf n obaqznvq,
orgebgurq gb na uhfonaq, naq abg ng nyy erqrrzrq, abe serrqbz tvira
ure; fur funyy or fpbhetrq; gurl funyy abg or chg gb qrngu, orpnhfr
fur jnf abg serr.

19:21 Naq ur funyy oevat uvf gerfcnff bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ, hagb gur
qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, rira n enz sbe n gerfcnff
bssrevat.

19:22 Naq gur cevrfg funyy znxr na ngbarzrag sbe uvz jvgu gur enz bs
gur gerfcnff bssrevat orsber gur YBEQ sbe uvf fva juvpu ur ungu qbar:
naq gur fva juvpu ur ungu qbar funyy or sbetvira uvz.

19:23 Naq jura lr funyy pbzr vagb gur ynaq, naq funyy unir cynagrq nyy
znaare bs gerrf sbe sbbq, gura lr funyy pbhag gur sehvg gurerbs nf
hapvephzpvfrq: guerr lrnef funyy vg or nf hapvephzpvfrq hagb lbh: vg
funyy abg or rngra bs.

19:24 Ohg va gur sbhegu lrne nyy gur sehvg gurerbs funyy or ubyl gb
cenvfr gur YBEQ jvguny.

19:25 Naq va gur svsgu lrne funyy lr rng bs gur sehvg gurerbs, gung vg
znl lvryq hagb lbh gur vapernfr gurerbs: V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

19:26 Lr funyy abg rng nal guvat jvgu gur oybbq: arvgure funyy lr hfr
rapunagzrag, abe bofreir gvzrf.

19:27 Lr funyy abg ebhaq gur pbearef bs lbhe urnqf, arvgure funyg gubh
zne gur pbearef bs gul orneq.

19:28 Lr funyy abg znxr nal phggvatf va lbhe syrfu sbe gur qrnq, abe
cevag nal znexf hcba lbh: V nz gur YBEQ.

19:29 Qb abg cebfgvghgr gul qnhtugre, gb pnhfr ure gb or n juber; yrfg
gur ynaq snyy gb juberqbz, naq gur ynaq orpbzr shyy bs jvpxrqarff.

19:30 Lr funyy xrrc zl fnoonguf, naq erirerapr zl fnapghnel: V nz gur
YBEQ.

19:31 Ertneq abg gurz gung unir snzvyvne fcvevgf, arvgure frrx nsgre
jvmneqf, gb or qrsvyrq ol gurz: V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

19:32 Gubh funyg evfr hc orsber gur ubnel urnq, naq ubabhe gur snpr bs
gur byq zna, naq srne gul Tbq: V nz gur YBEQ.

19:33 Naq vs n fgenatre fbwbhea jvgu gurr va lbhe ynaq, lr funyy abg
irk uvz.

19:34 Ohg gur fgenatre gung qjryyrgu jvgu lbh funyy or hagb lbh nf bar
obea nzbat lbh, naq gubh funyg ybir uvz nf gulfrys; sbe lr jrer
fgenatref va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg: V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

19:35 Lr funyy qb ab haevtugrbhfarff va whqtzrag, va zrgrlneq, va
jrvtug, be va zrnfher.

19:36 Whfg onynaprf, whfg jrvtugf, n whfg rcunu, naq n whfg uva, funyy
lr unir: V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, juvpu oebhtug lbh bhg bs gur ynaq bs
Rtlcg.

19:37 Gurersber funyy lr bofreir nyy zl fgnghgrf, naq nyy zl
whqtzragf, naq qb gurz: V nz gur YBEQ.

20:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 20:2 Ntnva, gubh funyg fnl
gb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, Jubfbrire ur or bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry,
be bs gur fgenatref gung fbwbhea va Vfenry, gung tvirgu nal bs uvf
frrq hagb Zbyrpu; ur funyy fheryl or chg gb qrngu: gur crbcyr bs gur
ynaq funyy fgbar uvz jvgu fgbarf.

20:3 Naq V jvyy frg zl snpr ntnvafg gung zna, naq jvyy phg uvz bss
sebz nzbat uvf crbcyr; orpnhfr ur ungu tvira bs uvf frrq hagb Zbyrpu,
gb qrsvyr zl fnapghnel, naq gb cebsnar zl ubyl anzr.

20:4 Naq vs gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq qb nal jnlf uvqr gurve rlrf sebz
gur zna, jura ur tvirgu bs uvf frrq hagb Zbyrpu, naq xvyy uvz abg:
20:5 Gura V jvyy frg zl snpr ntnvafg gung zna, naq ntnvafg uvf snzvyl,
naq jvyy phg uvz bss, naq nyy gung tb n jubevat nsgre uvz, gb pbzzvg
juberqbz jvgu Zbyrpu, sebz nzbat gurve crbcyr.

20:6 Naq gur fbhy gung gheargu nsgre fhpu nf unir snzvyvne fcvevgf,
naq nsgre jvmneqf, gb tb n jubevat nsgre gurz, V jvyy rira frg zl snpr
ntnvafg gung fbhy, naq jvyy phg uvz bss sebz nzbat uvf crbcyr.

20:7 Fnapgvsl lbhefryirf gurersber, naq or lr ubyl: sbe V nz gur YBEQ
lbhe Tbq.

20:8 Naq lr funyy xrrc zl fgnghgrf, naq qb gurz: V nz gur YBEQ juvpu
fnapgvsl lbh.

20:9 Sbe rirel bar gung phefrgu uvf sngure be uvf zbgure funyy or
fheryl chg gb qrngu: ur ungu phefrq uvf sngure be uvf zbgure; uvf
oybbq funyy or hcba uvz.

20:10 Naq gur zna gung pbzzvggrgu nqhygrel jvgu nabgure zna'f jvsr,
rira ur gung pbzzvggrgu nqhygrel jvgu uvf arvtuobhe'f jvsr, gur
nqhygrere naq gur nqhygrerff funyy fheryl or chg gb qrngu.

20:11 Naq gur zna gung yvrgu jvgu uvf sngure'f jvsr ungu hapbirerq uvf
sngure'f anxrqarff: obgu bs gurz funyy fheryl or chg gb qrngu; gurve
oybbq funyy or hcba gurz.

20:12 Naq vs n zna yvr jvgu uvf qnhtugre va ynj, obgu bs gurz funyy
fheryl or chg gb qrngu: gurl unir jebhtug pbashfvba; gurve oybbq funyy
or hcba gurz.

20:13 Vs n zna nyfb yvr jvgu znaxvaq, nf ur yvrgu jvgu n jbzna, obgu
bs gurz unir pbzzvggrq na nobzvangvba: gurl funyy fheryl or chg gb
qrngu; gurve oybbq funyy or hcba gurz.

20:14 Naq vs n zna gnxr n jvsr naq ure zbgure, vg vf jvpxrqarff: gurl
funyy or oheag jvgu sver, obgu ur naq gurl; gung gurer or ab
jvpxrqarff nzbat lbh.

20:15 Naq vs n zna yvr jvgu n ornfg, ur funyy fheryl or chg gb qrngu:
naq lr funyy fynl gur ornfg.

20:16 Naq vs n jbzna nccebnpu hagb nal ornfg, naq yvr qbja gurergb,
gubh funyg xvyy gur jbzna, naq gur ornfg: gurl funyy fheryl or chg gb
qrngu; gurve oybbq funyy or hcba gurz.

20:17 Naq vs n zna funyy gnxr uvf fvfgre, uvf sngure'f qnhtugre, be
uvf zbgure'f qnhtugre, naq frr ure anxrqarff, naq fur frr uvf
anxrqarff; vg vf n jvpxrq guvat; naq gurl funyy or phg bss va gur
fvtug bs gurve crbcyr: ur ungu hapbirerq uvf fvfgre'f anxrqarff; ur
funyy orne uvf vavdhvgl.

20:18 Naq vs n zna funyy yvr jvgu n jbzna univat ure fvpxarff, naq
funyy hapbire ure anxrqarff; ur ungu qvfpbirerq ure sbhagnva, naq fur
ungu hapbirerq gur sbhagnva bs ure oybbq: naq obgu bs gurz funyy or
phg bss sebz nzbat gurve crbcyr.

20:19 Naq gubh funyg abg hapbire gur anxrqarff bs gul zbgure'f fvfgre,
abe bs gul sngure'f fvfgre: sbe ur hapbirergu uvf arne xva: gurl funyy
orne gurve vavdhvgl.

20:20 Naq vs n zna funyy yvr jvgu uvf hapyr'f jvsr, ur ungu hapbirerq
uvf hapyr'f anxrqarff: gurl funyy orne gurve fva; gurl funyy qvr
puvyqyrff.

20:21 Naq vs n zna funyy gnxr uvf oebgure'f jvsr, vg vf na hapyrna
guvat: ur ungu hapbirerq uvf oebgure'f anxrqarff; gurl funyy or
puvyqyrff.

20:22 Lr funyy gurersber xrrc nyy zl fgnghgrf, naq nyy zl whqtzragf,
naq qb gurz: gung gur ynaq, juvgure V oevat lbh gb qjryy gurerva, fchr
lbh abg bhg.

20:23 Naq lr funyy abg jnyx va gur znaaref bs gur angvba, juvpu V pnfg
bhg orsber lbh: sbe gurl pbzzvggrq nyy gurfr guvatf, naq gurersber V
noubeerq gurz.

20:24 Ohg V unir fnvq hagb lbh, Lr funyy vaurevg gurve ynaq, naq V
jvyy tvir vg hagb lbh gb cbffrff vg, n ynaq gung sybjrgu jvgu zvyx naq
ubarl: V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, juvpu unir frcnengrq lbh sebz bgure
crbcyr.

20:25 Lr funyy gurersber chg qvssrerapr orgjrra pyrna ornfgf naq
hapyrna, naq orgjrra hapyrna sbjyf naq pyrna: naq lr funyy abg znxr
lbhe fbhyf nobzvanoyr ol ornfg, be ol sbjy, be ol nal znaare bs yvivat
guvat gung perrcrgu ba gur tebhaq, juvpu V unir frcnengrq sebz lbh nf
hapyrna.

20:26 Naq lr funyy or ubyl hagb zr: sbe V gur YBEQ nz ubyl, naq unir
frirerq lbh sebz bgure crbcyr, gung lr fubhyq or zvar.

20:27 N zna nyfb be jbzna gung ungu n snzvyvne fcvevg, be gung vf n
jvmneq, funyy fheryl or chg gb qrngu: gurl funyy fgbar gurz jvgu
fgbarf: gurve oybbq funyy or hcba gurz.

21:1 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Fcrnx hagb gur cevrfgf gur fbaf bs
Nneba, naq fnl hagb gurz, Gurer funyy abar or qrsvyrq sbe gur qrnq
nzbat uvf crbcyr: 21:2 Ohg sbe uvf xva, gung vf arne hagb uvz, gung
vf, sbe uvf zbgure, naq sbe uvf sngure, naq sbe uvf fba, naq sbe uvf
qnhtugre, naq sbe uvf oebgure.

21:3 Naq sbe uvf fvfgre n ivetva, gung vf avtu hagb uvz, juvpu ungu
unq ab uhfonaq; sbe ure znl ur or qrsvyrq.

21:4 Ohg ur funyy abg qrsvyr uvzfrys, orvat n puvrs zna nzbat uvf
crbcyr, gb cebsnar uvzfrys.

21:5 Gurl funyy abg znxr onyqarff hcba gurve urnq, arvgure funyy gurl
funir bss gur pbeare bs gurve orneq, abe znxr nal phggvatf va gurve
syrfu.

21:6 Gurl funyy or ubyl hagb gurve Tbq, naq abg cebsnar gur anzr bs
gurve Tbq: sbe gur bssrevatf bs gur YBEQ znqr ol sver, naq gur oernq
bs gurve Tbq, gurl qb bssre: gurersber gurl funyy or ubyl.

21:7 Gurl funyy abg gnxr n jvsr gung vf n juber, be cebsnar; arvgure
funyy gurl gnxr n jbzna chg njnl sebz ure uhfonaq: sbe ur vf ubyl hagb
uvf Tbq.

21:8 Gubh funyg fnapgvsl uvz gurersber; sbe ur bssrergu gur oernq bs
gul Tbq: ur funyy or ubyl hagb gurr: sbe V gur YBEQ, juvpu fnapgvsl
lbh, nz ubyl.

21:9 Naq gur qnhtugre bs nal cevrfg, vs fur cebsnar urefrys ol cynlvat
gur juber, fur cebsnargu ure sngure: fur funyy or oheag jvgu sver.

21:10 Naq ur gung vf gur uvtu cevrfg nzbat uvf oerguera, hcba jubfr
urnq gur nabvagvat bvy jnf cbherq, naq gung vf pbafrpengrq gb chg ba
gur tnezragf, funyy abg hapbire uvf urnq, abe eraq uvf pybgurf; 21:11
Arvgure funyy ur tb va gb nal qrnq obql, abe qrsvyr uvzfrys sbe uvf
sngure, be sbe uvf zbgure; 21:12 Arvgure funyy ur tb bhg bs gur
fnapghnel, abe cebsnar gur fnapghnel bs uvf Tbq; sbe gur pebja bs gur
nabvagvat bvy bs uvf Tbq vf hcba uvz: V nz gur YBEQ.

21:13 Naq ur funyy gnxr n jvsr va ure ivetvavgl.

21:14 N jvqbj, be n qvibeprq jbzna, be cebsnar, be na uneybg, gurfr
funyy ur abg gnxr: ohg ur funyy gnxr n ivetva bs uvf bja crbcyr gb
jvsr.

21:15 Arvgure funyy ur cebsnar uvf frrq nzbat uvf crbcyr: sbe V gur
YBEQ qb fnapgvsl uvz.

21:16 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 21:17 Fcrnx hagb Nneba,
fnlvat, Jubfbrire ur or bs gul frrq va gurve trarengvbaf gung ungu nal
oyrzvfu, yrg uvz abg nccebnpu gb bssre gur oernq bs uvf Tbq.

21:18 Sbe jungfbrire zna ur or gung ungu n oyrzvfu, ur funyy abg
nccebnpu: n oyvaq zna, be n ynzr, be ur gung ungu n syng abfr, be nal
guvat fhcresyhbhf, 21:19 Be n zna gung vf oebxrasbbgrq, be
oebxraunaqrq, 21:20 Be pebbxonpxg, be n qjnes, be gung ungu n oyrzvfu
va uvf rlr, be or fpheil, be fpnoorq, be ungu uvf fgbarf oebxra; 21:21
Ab zna gung ungu n oyrzvfu bs gur frrq bs Nneba gur cevrfg funyy pbzr
avtu gb bssre gur bssrevatf bs gur YBEQ znqr ol sver: ur ungu n
oyrzvfu; ur funyy abg pbzr avtu gb bssre gur oernq bs uvf Tbq.

21:22 Ur funyy rng gur oernq bs uvf Tbq, obgu bs gur zbfg ubyl, naq bs
gur ubyl.

21:23 Bayl ur funyy abg tb va hagb gur invy, abe pbzr avtu hagb gur
nygne, orpnhfr ur ungu n oyrzvfu; gung ur cebsnar abg zl fnapghnevrf:
sbe V gur YBEQ qb fnapgvsl gurz.

21:24 Naq Zbfrf gbyq vg hagb Nneba, naq gb uvf fbaf, naq hagb nyy gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry.

22:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 22:2 Fcrnx hagb Nneba naq
gb uvf fbaf, gung gurl frcnengr gurzfryirf sebz gur ubyl guvatf bs gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq gung gurl cebsnar abg zl ubyl anzr va gubfr
guvatf juvpu gurl unyybj hagb zr: V nz gur YBEQ.

22:3 Fnl hagb gurz, Jubfbrire ur or bs nyy lbhe frrq nzbat lbhe
trarengvbaf, gung tbrgu hagb gur ubyl guvatf, juvpu gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry unyybj hagb gur YBEQ, univat uvf hapyrnaarff hcba uvz, gung
fbhy funyy or phg bss sebz zl cerfrapr: V nz gur YBEQ.

22:4 Jung zna fbrire bs gur frrq bs Nneba vf n yrcre, be ungu n
ehaavat vffhr; ur funyy abg rng bs gur ubyl guvatf, hagvy ur or pyrna.
Naq jubfb gbhpurgu nal guvat gung vf hapyrna ol gur qrnq, be n zna
jubfr frrq tbrgu sebz uvz; 22:5 Be jubfbrire gbhpurgu nal perrcvat
guvat, jurerol ur znl or znqr hapyrna, be n zna bs jubz ur znl gnxr
hapyrnaarff, jungfbrire hapyrnaarff ur ungu; 22:6 Gur fbhy juvpu ungu
gbhpurq nal fhpu funyy or hapyrna hagvy rira, naq funyy abg rng bs gur
ubyl guvatf, hayrff ur jnfu uvf syrfu jvgu jngre.

22:7 Naq jura gur fha vf qbja, ur funyy or pyrna, naq funyy nsgrejneq
rng bs gur ubyl guvatf; orpnhfr vg vf uvf sbbq.

22:8 Gung juvpu qvrgu bs vgfrys, be vf gbea jvgu ornfgf, ur funyy abg
rng gb qrsvyr uvzfrys gurerjvgu; V nz gur YBEQ.

22:9 Gurl funyy gurersber xrrc zvar beqvanapr, yrfg gurl orne fva sbe
vg, naq qvr gurersber, vs gurl cebsnar vg: V gur YBEQ qb fnapgvsl
gurz.

22:10 Gurer funyy ab fgenatre rng bs gur ubyl guvat: n fbwbheare bs
gur cevrfg, be na uverq freinag, funyy abg rng bs gur ubyl guvat.

22:11 Ohg vs gur cevrfg ohl nal fbhy jvgu uvf zbarl, ur funyy rng bs
vg, naq ur gung vf obea va uvf ubhfr: gurl funyy rng bs uvf zrng.

22:12 Vs gur cevrfg'f qnhtugre nyfb or zneevrq hagb n fgenatre, fur
znl abg rng bs na bssrevat bs gur ubyl guvatf.

22:13 Ohg vs gur cevrfg'f qnhtugre or n jvqbj, be qvibeprq, naq unir
ab puvyq, naq vf erghearq hagb ure sngure'f ubhfr, nf va ure lbhgu,
fur funyy rng bs ure sngure'f zrng: ohg gurer funyy or ab fgenatre rng
gurerbs.

22:14 Naq vs n zna rng bs gur ubyl guvat hajvggvatyl, gura ur funyy
chg gur svsgu cneg gurerbs hagb vg, naq funyy tvir vg hagb gur cevrfg
jvgu gur ubyl guvat.

22:15 Naq gurl funyy abg cebsnar gur ubyl guvatf bs gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, juvpu gurl bssre hagb gur YBEQ; 22:16 Be fhssre gurz gb orne
gur vavdhvgl bs gerfcnff, jura gurl rng gurve ubyl guvatf: sbe V gur
YBEQ qb fnapgvsl gurz.

22:17 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 22:18 Fcrnx hagb Nneba,
naq gb uvf fbaf, naq hagb nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq fnl hagb
gurz, Jungfbrire ur or bs gur ubhfr bs Vfenry, be bs gur fgenatref va
Vfenry, gung jvyy bssre uvf boyngvba sbe nyy uvf ibjf, naq sbe nyy uvf
serrjvyy bssrevatf, juvpu gurl jvyy bssre hagb gur YBEQ sbe n oheag
bssrevat; 22:19 Lr funyy bssre ng lbhe bja jvyy n znyr jvgubhg
oyrzvfu, bs gur orrirf, bs gur furrc, be bs gur tbngf.

22:20 Ohg jungfbrire ungu n oyrzvfu, gung funyy lr abg bssre: sbe vg
funyy abg or npprcgnoyr sbe lbh.

22:21 Naq jubfbrire bssrergu n fnpevsvpr bs crnpr bssrevatf hagb gur
YBEQ gb nppbzcyvfu uvf ibj, be n serrjvyy bssrevat va orrirf be furrc,
vg funyy or cresrpg gb or npprcgrq; gurer funyy or ab oyrzvfu gurerva.

22:22 Oyvaq, be oebxra, be znvzrq, be univat n jra, be fpheil, be
fpnoorq, lr funyy abg bssre gurfr hagb gur YBEQ, abe znxr na bssrevat
ol sver bs gurz hcba gur nygne hagb gur YBEQ.

22:23 Rvgure n ohyybpx be n ynzo gung ungu nal guvat fhcresyhbhf be
ynpxvat va uvf cnegf, gung znlrfg gubh bssre sbe n serrjvyy bssrevat;
ohg sbe n ibj vg funyy abg or npprcgrq.

22:24 Lr funyy abg bssre hagb gur YBEQ gung juvpu vf oehvfrq, be
pehfurq, be oebxra, be phg; arvgure funyy lr znxr nal bssrevat gurerbs
va lbhe ynaq.

22:25 Arvgure sebz n fgenatre'f unaq funyy lr bssre gur oernq bs lbhe
Tbq bs nal bs gurfr; orpnhfr gurve pbeehcgvba vf va gurz, naq
oyrzvfurf or va gurz: gurl funyy abg or npprcgrq sbe lbh.

22:26 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 22:27 Jura n ohyybpx, be
n furrc, be n tbng, vf oebhtug sbegu, gura vg funyy or frira qnlf
haqre gur qnz; naq sebz gur rvtugu qnl naq guraprsbegu vg funyy or
npprcgrq sbe na bssrevat znqr ol sver hagb gur YBEQ.

22:28 Naq jurgure vg or pbj, be rjr, lr funyy abg xvyy vg naq ure
lbhat obgu va bar qnl.

22:29 Naq jura lr jvyy bssre n fnpevsvpr bs gunaxftvivat hagb gur
YBEQ, bssre vg ng lbhe bja jvyy.

22:30 Ba gur fnzr qnl vg funyy or rngra hc; lr funyy yrnir abar bs vg
hagvy gur zbeebj: V nz gur YBEQ.

22:31 Gurersber funyy lr xrrc zl pbzznaqzragf, naq qb gurz: V nz gur
YBEQ.

22:32 Arvgure funyy lr cebsnar zl ubyl anzr; ohg V jvyy or unyybjrq
nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry: V nz gur YBEQ juvpu unyybj lbh, 22:33
Gung oebhtug lbh bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, gb or lbhe Tbq: V nz gur
YBEQ.

23:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 23:2 Fcrnx hagb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq fnl hagb gurz, Pbapreavat gur srnfgf bs gur
YBEQ, juvpu lr funyy cebpynvz gb or ubyl pbaibpngvbaf, rira gurfr ner
zl srnfgf.

23:3 Fvk qnlf funyy jbex or qbar: ohg gur friragu qnl vf gur fnoongu
bs erfg, na ubyl pbaibpngvba; lr funyy qb ab jbex gurerva: vg vf gur
fnoongu bs gur YBEQ va nyy lbhe qjryyvatf.

23:4 Gurfr ner gur srnfgf bs gur YBEQ, rira ubyl pbaibpngvbaf, juvpu
lr funyy cebpynvz va gurve frnfbaf.

23:5 Va gur sbhegrragu qnl bs gur svefg zbagu ng rira vf gur YBEQ'f
cnffbire.

23:6 Naq ba gur svsgrragu qnl bs gur fnzr zbagu vf gur srnfg bs
hayrnirarq oernq hagb gur YBEQ: frira qnlf lr zhfg rng hayrnirarq
oernq.

23:7 Va gur svefg qnl lr funyy unir na ubyl pbaibpngvba: lr funyy qb
ab freivyr jbex gurerva.

23:8 Ohg lr funyy bssre na bssrevat znqr ol sver hagb gur YBEQ frira
qnlf: va gur friragu qnl vf na ubyl pbaibpngvba: lr funyy qb ab
freivyr jbex gurerva.

23:9 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 23:10 Fcrnx hagb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq fnl hagb gurz, Jura lr or pbzr vagb gur ynaq
juvpu V tvir hagb lbh, naq funyy ernc gur uneirfg gurerbs, gura lr
funyy oevat n furns bs gur svefgsehvgf bs lbhe uneirfg hagb gur
cevrfg: 23:11 Naq ur funyy jnir gur furns orsber gur YBEQ, gb or
npprcgrq sbe lbh: ba gur zbeebj nsgre gur fnoongu gur cevrfg funyy
jnir vg.

23:12 Naq lr funyy bssre gung qnl jura lr jnir gur furns na ur ynzo
jvgubhg oyrzvfu bs gur svefg lrne sbe n oheag bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ.

23:13 Naq gur zrng bssrevat gurerbs funyy or gjb gragu qrnyf bs svar
sybhe zvatyrq jvgu bvy, na bssrevat znqr ol sver hagb gur YBEQ sbe n
fjrrg fnibhe: naq gur qevax bssrevat gurerbs funyy or bs jvar, gur
sbhegu cneg bs na uva.

23:14 Naq lr funyy rng arvgure oernq, abe cnepurq pbea, abe terra
rnef, hagvy gur frysfnzr qnl gung lr unir oebhtug na bssrevat hagb
lbhe Tbq: vg funyy or n fgnghgr sbe rire guebhtubhg lbhe trarengvbaf
va nyy lbhe qjryyvatf.

23:15 Naq lr funyy pbhag hagb lbh sebz gur zbeebj nsgre gur fnoongu,
sebz gur qnl gung lr oebhtug gur furns bs gur jnir bssrevat; frira
fnoonguf funyy or pbzcyrgr: 23:16 Rira hagb gur zbeebj nsgre gur
friragu fnoongu funyy lr ahzore svsgl qnlf; naq lr funyy bssre n arj
zrng bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ.

23:17 Lr funyy oevat bhg bs lbhe unovgngvbaf gjb jnir ybnirf bs gjb
gragu qrnyf; gurl funyy or bs svar sybhe; gurl funyy or onxra jvgu
yrnira; gurl ner gur svefgsehvgf hagb gur YBEQ.

23:18 Naq lr funyy bssre jvgu gur oernq frira ynzof jvgubhg oyrzvfu bs
gur svefg lrne, naq bar lbhat ohyybpx, naq gjb enzf: gurl funyy or sbe
n oheag bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ, jvgu gurve zrng bssrevat, naq gurve
qevax bssrevatf, rira na bssrevat znqr ol sver, bs fjrrg fnibhe hagb
gur YBEQ.

23:19 Gura lr funyy fnpevsvpr bar xvq bs gur tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat,
naq gjb ynzof bs gur svefg lrne sbe n fnpevsvpr bs crnpr bssrevatf.

23:20 Naq gur cevrfg funyy jnir gurz jvgu gur oernq bs gur svefgsehvgf
sbe n jnir bssrevat orsber gur YBEQ, jvgu gur gjb ynzof: gurl funyy or
ubyl gb gur YBEQ sbe gur cevrfg.

23:21 Naq lr funyy cebpynvz ba gur frysfnzr qnl, gung vg znl or na
ubyl pbaibpngvba hagb lbh: lr funyy qb ab freivyr jbex gurerva: vg
funyy or n fgnghgr sbe rire va nyy lbhe qjryyvatf guebhtubhg lbhe
trarengvbaf.

23:22 Naq jura lr ernc gur uneirfg bs lbhe ynaq, gubh funyg abg znxr
pyrna evqqnapr bs gur pbearef bs gul svryq jura gubh erncrfg, arvgure
funyg gubh tngure nal tyrnavat bs gul uneirfg: gubh funyg yrnir gurz
hagb gur cbbe, naq gb gur fgenatre: V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

23:23 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 23:24 Fcrnx hagb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Va gur friragu zbagu, va gur svefg qnl bs
gur zbagu, funyy lr unir n fnoongu, n zrzbevny bs oybjvat bs gehzcrgf,
na ubyl pbaibpngvba.

23:25 Lr funyy qb ab freivyr jbex gurerva: ohg lr funyy bssre na
bssrevat znqr ol sver hagb gur YBEQ.

23:26 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 23:27 Nyfb ba gur gragu
qnl bs guvf friragu zbagu gurer funyy or n qnl bs ngbarzrag: vg funyy
or na ubyl pbaibpngvba hagb lbh; naq lr funyy nssyvpg lbhe fbhyf, naq
bssre na bssrevat znqr ol sver hagb gur YBEQ.

23:28 Naq lr funyy qb ab jbex va gung fnzr qnl: sbe vg vf n qnl bs
ngbarzrag, gb znxr na ngbarzrag sbe lbh orsber gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

23:29 Sbe jungfbrire fbhy vg or gung funyy abg or nssyvpgrq va gung
fnzr qnl, ur funyy or phg bss sebz nzbat uvf crbcyr.

23:30 Naq jungfbrire fbhy vg or gung qbrgu nal jbex va gung fnzr qnl,
gur fnzr fbhy jvyy V qrfgebl sebz nzbat uvf crbcyr.

23:31 Lr funyy qb ab znaare bs jbex: vg funyy or n fgnghgr sbe rire
guebhtubhg lbhe trarengvbaf va nyy lbhe qjryyvatf.

23:32 Vg funyy or hagb lbh n fnoongu bs erfg, naq lr funyy nssyvpg
lbhe fbhyf: va gur avagu qnl bs gur zbagu ng rira, sebz rira hagb
rira, funyy lr pryroengr lbhe fnoongu.

23:33 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 23:34 Fcrnx hagb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Gur svsgrragu qnl bs guvf friragu zbagu
funyy or gur srnfg bs gnoreanpyrf sbe frira qnlf hagb gur YBEQ.

23:35 Ba gur svefg qnl funyy or na ubyl pbaibpngvba: lr funyy qb ab
freivyr jbex gurerva.

23:36 Frira qnlf lr funyy bssre na bssrevat znqr ol sver hagb gur
YBEQ: ba gur rvtugu qnl funyy or na ubyl pbaibpngvba hagb lbh; naq lr
funyy bssre na bssrevat znqr ol sver hagb gur YBEQ: vg vf n fbyrza
nffrzoyl; naq lr funyy qb ab freivyr jbex gurerva.

23:37 Gurfr ner gur srnfgf bs gur YBEQ, juvpu lr funyy cebpynvz gb or
ubyl pbaibpngvbaf, gb bssre na bssrevat znqr ol sver hagb gur YBEQ, n
oheag bssrevat, naq n zrng bssrevat, n fnpevsvpr, naq qevax bssrevatf,
rirel guvat hcba uvf qnl: 23:38 Orfvqr gur fnoonguf bs gur YBEQ, naq
orfvqr lbhe tvsgf, naq orfvqr nyy lbhe ibjf, naq orfvqr nyy lbhe
serrjvyy bssrevatf, juvpu lr tvir hagb gur YBEQ.

23:39 Nyfb va gur svsgrragu qnl bs gur friragu zbagu, jura lr unir
tngurerq va gur sehvg bs gur ynaq, lr funyy xrrc n srnfg hagb gur YBEQ
frira qnlf: ba gur svefg qnl funyy or n fnoongu, naq ba gur rvtugu qnl
funyy or n fnoongu.

23:40 Naq lr funyy gnxr lbh ba gur svefg qnl gur obhtuf bs tbbqyl
gerrf, oenapurf bs cnyz gerrf, naq gur obhtuf bs guvpx gerrf, naq
jvyybjf bs gur oebbx; naq lr funyy erwbvpr orsber gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq
frira qnlf.

23:41 Naq lr funyy xrrc vg n srnfg hagb gur YBEQ frira qnlf va gur
lrne.

Vg funyy or n fgnghgr sbe rire va lbhe trarengvbaf: lr funyy pryroengr
vg va gur friragu zbagu.

23:42 Lr funyy qjryy va obbguf frira qnlf; nyy gung ner Vfenryvgrf
obea funyy qjryy va obbguf: 23:43 Gung lbhe trarengvbaf znl xabj gung
V znqr gur puvyqera bs Vfenry gb qjryy va obbguf, jura V oebhtug gurz
bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg: V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

23:44 Naq Zbfrf qrpynerq hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry gur srnfgf bs gur
YBEQ.

24:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 24:2 Pbzznaq gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry, gung gurl oevat hagb gurr cher bvy byvir orngra sbe gur
yvtug, gb pnhfr gur ynzcf gb ohea pbagvahnyyl.

24:3 Jvgubhg gur invy bs gur grfgvzbal, va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba, funyy Nneba beqre vg sebz gur riravat hagb gur zbeavat
orsber gur YBEQ pbagvahnyyl: vg funyy or n fgnghgr sbe rire va lbhe
trarengvbaf.

24:4 Ur funyy beqre gur ynzcf hcba gur cher pnaqyrfgvpx orsber gur
YBEQ pbagvahnyyl.

24:5 Naq gubh funyg gnxr svar sybhe, naq onxr gjryir pnxrf gurerbs:
gjb gragu qrnyf funyy or va bar pnxr.

24:6 Naq gubh funyg frg gurz va gjb ebjf, fvk ba n ebj, hcba gur cher
gnoyr orsber gur YBEQ.

24:7 Naq gubh funyg chg cher senaxvaprafr hcba rnpu ebj, gung vg znl
or ba gur oernq sbe n zrzbevny, rira na bssrevat znqr ol sver hagb gur
YBEQ.

24:8 Rirel fnoongu ur funyy frg vg va beqre orsber gur YBEQ
pbagvahnyyl, orvat gnxra sebz gur puvyqera bs Vfenry ol na rireynfgvat
pbiranag.

24:9 Naq vg funyy or Nneba'f naq uvf fbaf'; naq gurl funyy rng vg va
gur ubyl cynpr: sbe vg vf zbfg ubyl hagb uvz bs gur bssrevatf bs gur
YBEQ znqr ol sver ol n crecrghny fgnghgr.

24:10 Naq gur fba bs na Vfenryvgvfu jbzna, jubfr sngure jnf na
Rtlcgvna, jrag bhg nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry: naq guvf fba bs gur
Vfenryvgvfu jbzna naq n zna bs Vfenry fgebir gbtrgure va gur pnzc;
24:11 Naq gur Vfenryvgvfu jbzna'f fba oynfcurzrq gur anzr bs gur Ybeq,
naq phefrq. Naq gurl oebhtug uvz hagb Zbfrf: (naq uvf zbgure'f anzr
jnf Furybzvgu, gur qnhtugre bs Qvoev, bs gur gevor bs Qna:) 24:12 Naq
gurl chg uvz va jneq, gung gur zvaq bs gur YBEQ zvtug or furjrq gurz.

24:13 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 24:14 Oevat sbegu uvz
gung ungu phefrq jvgubhg gur pnzc; naq yrg nyy gung urneq uvz ynl
gurve unaqf hcba uvf urnq, naq yrg nyy gur pbatertngvba fgbar uvz.

24:15 Naq gubh funyg fcrnx hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, fnlvat,
Jubfbrire phefrgu uvf Tbq funyy orne uvf fva.

24:16 Naq ur gung oynfcurzrgu gur anzr bs gur YBEQ, ur funyy fheryl or
chg gb qrngu, naq nyy gur pbatertngvba funyy pregnvayl fgbar uvz: nf
jryy gur fgenatre, nf ur gung vf obea va gur ynaq, jura ur oynfcurzrgu
gur anzr bs gur Ybeq, funyy or chg gb qrngu.

24:17 Naq ur gung xvyyrgu nal zna funyy fheryl or chg gb qrngu.

24:18 Naq ur gung xvyyrgu n ornfg funyy znxr vg tbbq; ornfg sbe ornfg.

24:19 Naq vs n zna pnhfr n oyrzvfu va uvf arvtuobhe; nf ur ungu qbar,
fb funyy vg or qbar gb uvz; 24:20 Oernpu sbe oernpu, rlr sbe rlr,
gbbgu sbe gbbgu: nf ur ungu pnhfrq n oyrzvfu va n zna, fb funyy vg or
qbar gb uvz ntnva.

24:21 Naq ur gung xvyyrgu n ornfg, ur funyy erfgber vg: naq ur gung
xvyyrgu n zna, ur funyy or chg gb qrngu.

24:22 Lr funyy unir bar znaare bs ynj, nf jryy sbe gur fgenatre, nf
sbe bar bs lbhe bja pbhagel: sbe V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

24:23 Naq Zbfrf fcnxr gb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, gung gurl fubhyq
oevat sbegu uvz gung unq phefrq bhg bs gur pnzc, naq fgbar uvz jvgu
fgbarf. Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

25:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf va zbhag Fvanv, fnlvat, 25:2 Fcrnx
hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq fnl hagb gurz, Jura lr pbzr vagb gur
ynaq juvpu V tvir lbh, gura funyy gur ynaq xrrc n fnoongu hagb gur
YBEQ.

25:3 Fvk lrnef gubh funyg fbj gul svryq, naq fvk lrnef gubh funyg
cehar gul ivarlneq, naq tngure va gur sehvg gurerbs; 25:4 Ohg va gur
friragu lrne funyy or n fnoongu bs erfg hagb gur ynaq, n fnoongu sbe
gur YBEQ: gubh funyg arvgure fbj gul svryq, abe cehar gul ivarlneq.

25:5 Gung juvpu tebjrgu bs vgf bja nppbeq bs gul uneirfg gubh funyg
abg ernc, arvgure tngure gur tencrf bs gul ivar haqerffrq: sbe vg vf n
lrne bs erfg hagb gur ynaq.

25:6 Naq gur fnoongu bs gur ynaq funyy or zrng sbe lbh; sbe gurr, naq
sbe gul freinag, naq sbe gul znvq, naq sbe gul uverq freinag, naq sbe
gul fgenatre gung fbwbheargu jvgu gurr.

25:7 Naq sbe gul pnggyr, naq sbe gur ornfg gung ner va gul ynaq, funyy
nyy gur vapernfr gurerbs or zrng.

25:8 Naq gubh funyg ahzore frira fnoonguf bs lrnef hagb gurr, frira
gvzrf frira lrnef; naq gur fcnpr bs gur frira fnoonguf bs lrnef funyy
or hagb gurr sbegl naq avar lrnef.

25:9 Gura funyg gubh pnhfr gur gehzcrg bs gur whovyr gb fbhaq ba gur
gragu qnl bs gur friragu zbagu, va gur qnl bs ngbarzrag funyy lr znxr
gur gehzcrg fbhaq guebhtubhg nyy lbhe ynaq.

25:10 Naq lr funyy unyybj gur svsgvrgu lrne, naq cebpynvz yvoregl
guebhtubhg nyy gur ynaq hagb nyy gur vaunovgnagf gurerbs: vg funyy or
n whovyr hagb lbh; naq lr funyy erghea rirel zna hagb uvf cbffrffvba,
naq lr funyy erghea rirel zna hagb uvf snzvyl.

25:11 N whovyr funyy gung svsgvrgu lrne or hagb lbh: lr funyy abg fbj,
arvgure ernc gung juvpu tebjrgu bs vgfrys va vg, abe tngure gur tencrf
va vg bs gul ivar haqerffrq.

25:12 Sbe vg vf gur whovyr; vg funyy or ubyl hagb lbh: lr funyy rng
gur vapernfr gurerbs bhg bs gur svryq.

25:13 Va gur lrne bs guvf whovyr lr funyy erghea rirel zna hagb uvf
cbffrffvba.

25:14 Naq vs gubh fryy bhtug hagb gul arvtuobhe, be ohlrfg bhtug bs
gul arvtuobhe'f unaq, lr funyy abg bccerff bar nabgure: 25:15
Nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs lrnef nsgre gur whovyr gubh funyg ohl bs
gul arvtuobhe, naq nppbeqvat hagb gur ahzore bs lrnef bs gur sehvgf ur
funyy fryy hagb gurr: 25:16 Nppbeqvat gb gur zhygvghqr bs lrnef gubh
funyg vapernfr gur cevpr gurerbs, naq nppbeqvat gb gur srjarff bs
lrnef gubh funyg qvzvavfu gur cevpr bs vg: sbe nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore
bs gur lrnef bs gur sehvgf qbgu ur fryy hagb gurr.

25:17 Lr funyy abg gurersber bccerff bar nabgure; ohg gubh funyg srne
gul Tbq:sbe V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

25:18 Jurersber lr funyy qb zl fgnghgrf, naq xrrc zl whqtzragf, naq qb
gurz; naq lr funyy qjryy va gur ynaq va fnsrgl.

25:19 Naq gur ynaq funyy lvryq ure sehvg, naq lr funyy rng lbhe svyy,
naq qjryy gurerva va fnsrgl.

25:20 Naq vs lr funyy fnl, Jung funyy jr rng gur friragu lrne? orubyq,
jr funyy abg fbj, abe tngure va bhe vapernfr: 25:21 Gura V jvyy
pbzznaq zl oyrffvat hcba lbh va gur fvkgu lrne, naq vg funyy oevat
sbegu sehvg sbe guerr lrnef.

25:22 Naq lr funyy fbj gur rvtugu lrne, naq rng lrg bs byq sehvg hagvy
gur avagu lrne; hagvy ure sehvgf pbzr va lr funyy rng bs gur byq
fgber.

25:23 Gur ynaq funyy abg or fbyq sbe rire: sbe gur ynaq vf zvar, sbe
lr ner fgenatref naq fbwbhearef jvgu zr.

25:24 Naq va nyy gur ynaq bs lbhe cbffrffvba lr funyy tenag n
erqrzcgvba sbe gur ynaq.

25:25 Vs gul oebgure or jnkra cbbe, naq ungu fbyq njnl fbzr bs uvf
cbffrffvba, naq vs nal bs uvf xva pbzr gb erqrrz vg, gura funyy ur
erqrrz gung juvpu uvf oebgure fbyq.

25:26 Naq vs gur zna unir abar gb erqrrz vg, naq uvzfrys or noyr gb
erqrrz vg; 25:27 Gura yrg uvz pbhag gur lrnef bs gur fnyr gurerbs, naq
erfgber gur birecyhf hagb gur zna gb jubz ur fbyq vg; gung ur znl
erghea hagb uvf cbffrffvba.

25:28 Ohg vs ur or abg noyr gb erfgber vg gb uvz, gura gung juvpu vf
fbyq funyy erznva va gur unaq bs uvz gung ungu obhtug vg hagvy gur
lrne bs whovyr: naq va gur whovyr vg funyy tb bhg, naq ur funyy erghea
hagb uvf cbffrffvba.

25:29 Naq vs n zna fryy n qjryyvat ubhfr va n jnyyrq pvgl, gura ur znl
erqrrz vg jvguva n jubyr lrne nsgre vg vf fbyq; jvguva n shyy lrne znl
ur erqrrz vg.

25:30 Naq vs vg or abg erqrrzrq jvguva gur fcnpr bs n shyy lrne, gura
gur ubhfr gung vf va gur jnyyrq pvgl funyy or rfgnoyvfurq sbe rire gb
uvz gung obhtug vg guebhtubhg uvf trarengvbaf: vg funyy abg tb bhg va
gur whovyr.

25:31 Ohg gur ubhfrf bs gur ivyyntrf juvpu unir ab jnyy ebhaq nobhg
gurz funyy or pbhagrq nf gur svryqf bs gur pbhagel: gurl znl or
erqrrzrq, naq gurl funyy tb bhg va gur whovyr.

25:32 Abgjvgufgnaqvat gur pvgvrf bs gur Yrivgrf, naq gur ubhfrf bs gur
pvgvrf bs gurve cbffrffvba, znl gur Yrivgrf erqrrz ng nal gvzr.

25:33 Naq vs n zna chepunfr bs gur Yrivgrf, gura gur ubhfr gung jnf
fbyq, naq gur pvgl bs uvf cbffrffvba, funyy tb bhg va gur lrne bs
whovyr: sbe gur ubhfrf bs gur pvgvrf bs gur Yrivgrf ner gurve
cbffrffvba nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

25:34 Ohg gur svryq bs gur fhoheof bs gurve pvgvrf znl abg or fbyq;
sbe vg vf gurve crecrghny cbffrffvba.

25:35 Naq vs gul oebgure or jnkra cbbe, naq snyyra va qrpnl jvgu gurr;
gura gubh funyg eryvrir uvz: lrn, gubhtu ur or n fgenatre, be n
fbwbheare; gung ur znl yvir jvgu gurr.

25:36 Gnxr gubh ab hfhel bs uvz, be vapernfr: ohg srne gul Tbq; gung
gul oebgure znl yvir jvgu gurr.

25:37 Gubh funyg abg tvir uvz gul zbarl hcba hfhel, abe yraq uvz gul
ivpghnyf sbe vapernfr.

25:38 V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, juvpu oebhtug lbh sbegu bhg bs gur ynaq
bs Rtlcg, gb tvir lbh gur ynaq bs Pnanna, naq gb or lbhe Tbq.

25:39 Naq vs gul oebgure gung qjryyrgu ol gurr or jnkra cbbe, naq or
fbyq hagb gurr; gubh funyg abg pbzcry uvz gb freir nf n obaqfreinag:
25:40 Ohg nf na uverq freinag, naq nf n fbwbheare, ur funyy or jvgu
gurr, naq funyy freir gurr hagb gur lrne bs whovyr.

25:41 Naq gura funyy ur qrcneg sebz gurr, obgu ur naq uvf puvyqera
jvgu uvz, naq funyy erghea hagb uvf bja snzvyl, naq hagb gur
cbffrffvba bs uvf snguref funyy ur erghea.

25:42 Sbe gurl ner zl freinagf, juvpu V oebhtug sbegu bhg bs gur ynaq
bs Rtlcg: gurl funyy abg or fbyq nf obaqzra.

25:43 Gubh funyg abg ehyr bire uvz jvgu evtbhe; ohg funyg srne gul
Tbq.

25:44 Obgu gul obaqzra, naq gul obaqznvqf, juvpu gubh funyg unir,
funyy or bs gur urngura gung ner ebhaq nobhg lbh; bs gurz funyy lr ohl
obaqzra naq obaqznvqf.

25:45 Zberbire bs gur puvyqera bs gur fgenatref gung qb fbwbhea nzbat
lbh, bs gurz funyy lr ohl, naq bs gurve snzvyvrf gung ner jvgu lbh,
juvpu gurl ortng va lbhe ynaq: naq gurl funyy or lbhe cbffrffvba.

25:46 Naq lr funyy gnxr gurz nf na vaurevgnapr sbe lbhe puvyqera nsgre
lbh, gb vaurevg gurz sbe n cbffrffvba; gurl funyy or lbhe obaqzra sbe
rire: ohg bire lbhe oerguera gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, lr funyy abg ehyr
bar bire nabgure jvgu evtbhe.

25:47 Naq vs n fbwbheare be fgenatre jnk evpu ol gurr, naq gul oebgure
gung qjryyrgu ol uvz jnk cbbe, naq fryy uvzfrys hagb gur fgenatre be
fbwbheare ol gurr, be gb gur fgbpx bs gur fgenatre'f snzvyl: 25:48
Nsgre gung ur vf fbyq ur znl or erqrrzrq ntnva; bar bs uvf oerguera
znl erqrrz uvz: 25:49 Rvgure uvf hapyr, be uvf hapyr'f fba, znl erqrrz
uvz, be nal gung vf avtu bs xva hagb uvz bs uvf snzvyl znl erqrrz uvz;
be vs ur or noyr, ur znl erqrrz uvzfrys.

25:50 Naq ur funyy erpxba jvgu uvz gung obhtug uvz sebz gur lrne gung
ur jnf fbyq gb uvz hagb gur lrne bs whovyr: naq gur cevpr bs uvf fnyr
funyy or nppbeqvat hagb gur ahzore bs lrnef, nppbeqvat gb gur gvzr bs
na uverq freinag funyy vg or jvgu uvz.

25:51 Vs gurer or lrg znal lrnef oruvaq, nppbeqvat hagb gurz ur funyy
tvir ntnva gur cevpr bs uvf erqrzcgvba bhg bs gur zbarl gung ur jnf
obhtug sbe.

25:52 Naq vs gurer erznva ohg srj lrnef hagb gur lrne bs whovyr, gura
ur funyy pbhag jvgu uvz, naq nppbeqvat hagb uvf lrnef funyy ur tvir
uvz ntnva gur cevpr bs uvf erqrzcgvba.

25:53 Naq nf n lrneyl uverq freinag funyy ur or jvgu uvz: naq gur
bgure funyy abg ehyr jvgu evtbhe bire uvz va gul fvtug.

25:54 Naq vs ur or abg erqrrzrq va gurfr lrnef, gura ur funyy tb bhg
va gur lrne bs whovyr, obgu ur, naq uvf puvyqera jvgu uvz.

25:55 Sbe hagb zr gur puvyqera bs Vfenry ner freinagf; gurl ner zl
freinagf jubz V oebhtug sbegu bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg: V nz gur YBEQ
lbhe Tbq.

26:1 Lr funyy znxr lbh ab vqbyf abe tenira vzntr, arvgure erne lbh hc
n fgnaqvat vzntr, arvgure funyy lr frg hc nal vzntr bs fgbar va lbhe
ynaq, gb obj qbja hagb vg: sbe V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

26:2 Lr funyy xrrc zl fnoonguf, naq erirerapr zl fnapghnel: V nz gur
YBEQ.

26:3 Vs lr jnyx va zl fgnghgrf, naq xrrc zl pbzznaqzragf, naq qb gurz;
26:4 Gura V jvyy tvir lbh enva va qhr frnfba, naq gur ynaq funyy lvryq
ure vapernfr, naq gur gerrf bs gur svryq funyy lvryq gurve sehvg.

26:5 Naq lbhe guerfuvat funyy ernpu hagb gur ivagntr, naq gur ivagntr
funyy ernpu hagb gur fbjvat gvzr: naq lr funyy rng lbhe oernq gb gur
shyy, naq qjryy va lbhe ynaq fnsryl.

26:6 Naq V jvyy tvir crnpr va gur ynaq, naq lr funyy yvr qbja, naq
abar funyy znxr lbh nsenvq: naq V jvyy evq rivy ornfgf bhg bs gur
ynaq, arvgure funyy gur fjbeq tb guebhtu lbhe ynaq.

26:7 Naq lr funyy punfr lbhe rarzvrf, naq gurl funyy snyy orsber lbh
ol gur fjbeq.

26:8 Naq svir bs lbh funyy punfr na uhaqerq, naq na uhaqerq bs lbh
funyy chg gra gubhfnaq gb syvtug: naq lbhe rarzvrf funyy snyy orsber
lbh ol gur fjbeq.

26:9 Sbe V jvyy unir erfcrpg hagb lbh, naq znxr lbh sehvgshy, naq
zhygvcyl lbh, naq rfgnoyvfu zl pbiranag jvgu lbh.

26:10 Naq lr funyy rng byq fgber, naq oevat sbegu gur byq orpnhfr bs
gur arj.

26:11 Naq V frg zl gnoreanpyr nzbat lbh: naq zl fbhy funyy abg noube
lbh.

26:12 Naq V jvyy jnyx nzbat lbh, naq jvyy or lbhe Tbq, naq lr funyy or
zl crbcyr.

26:13 V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, juvpu oebhtug lbh sbegu bhg bs gur ynaq
bs Rtlcg, gung lr fubhyq abg or gurve obaqzra; naq V unir oebxra gur
onaqf bs lbhe lbxr, naq znqr lbh tb hcevtug.

26:14 Ohg vs lr jvyy abg urnexra hagb zr, naq jvyy abg qb nyy gurfr
pbzznaqzragf; 26:15 Naq vs lr funyy qrfcvfr zl fgnghgrf, be vs lbhe
fbhy noube zl whqtzragf, fb gung lr jvyy abg qb nyy zl pbzznaqzragf,
ohg gung lr oernx zl pbiranag: 26:16 V nyfb jvyy qb guvf hagb lbh; V
jvyy rira nccbvag bire lbh greebe, pbafhzcgvba, naq gur oheavat nthr,
gung funyy pbafhzr gur rlrf, naq pnhfr fbeebj bs urneg: naq lr funyy
fbj lbhe frrq va inva, sbe lbhe rarzvrf funyy rng vg.

26:17 Naq V jvyy frg zl snpr ntnvafg lbh, naq lr funyy or fynva orsber
lbhe rarzvrf: gurl gung ungr lbh funyy ervta bire lbh; naq lr funyy
syrr jura abar chefhrgu lbh.

26:18 Naq vs lr jvyy abg lrg sbe nyy guvf urnexra hagb zr, gura V jvyy
chavfu lbh frira gvzrf zber sbe lbhe fvaf.

26:19 Naq V jvyy oernx gur cevqr bs lbhe cbjre; naq V jvyy znxr lbhe
urnira nf veba, naq lbhe rnegu nf oenff: 26:20 Naq lbhe fgeratgu funyy
or fcrag va inva: sbe lbhe ynaq funyy abg lvryq ure vapernfr, arvgure
funyy gur gerrf bs gur ynaq lvryq gurve sehvgf.

26:21 Naq vs lr jnyx pbagenel hagb zr, naq jvyy abg urnexra hagb zr; V
jvyy oevat frira gvzrf zber cynthrf hcba lbh nppbeqvat gb lbhe fvaf.

26:22 V jvyy nyfb fraq jvyq ornfgf nzbat lbh, juvpu funyy ebo lbh bs
lbhe puvyqera, naq qrfgebl lbhe pnggyr, naq znxr lbh srj va ahzore;
naq lbhe uvtu jnlf funyy or qrfbyngr.

26:23 Naq vs lr jvyy abg or ersbezrq ol zr ol gurfr guvatf, ohg jvyy
jnyx pbagenel hagb zr; 26:24 Gura jvyy V nyfb jnyx pbagenel hagb lbh,
naq jvyy chavfu lbh lrg frira gvzrf sbe lbhe fvaf.

26:25 Naq V jvyy oevat n fjbeq hcba lbh, gung funyy niratr gur dhneery
bs zl pbiranag: naq jura lr ner tngurerq gbtrgure jvguva lbhe pvgvrf,
V jvyy fraq gur crfgvyrapr nzbat lbh; naq lr funyy or qryvirerq vagb
gur unaq bs gur rarzl.

26:26 Naq jura V unir oebxra gur fgnss bs lbhe oernq, gra jbzra funyy
onxr lbhe oernq va bar bira, naq gurl funyy qryvire lbh lbhe oernq
ntnva ol jrvtug: naq lr funyy rng, naq abg or fngvfsvrq.

26:27 Naq vs lr jvyy abg sbe nyy guvf urnexra hagb zr, ohg jnyx
pbagenel hagb zr; 26:28 Gura V jvyy jnyx pbagenel hagb lbh nyfb va
shel; naq V, rira V, jvyy punfgvfr lbh frira gvzrf sbe lbhe fvaf.

26:29 Naq lr funyy rng gur syrfu bs lbhe fbaf, naq gur syrfu bs lbhe
qnhtugref funyy lr rng.

26:30 Naq V jvyy qrfgebl lbhe uvtu cynprf, naq phg qbja lbhe vzntrf,
naq pnfg lbhe pnepnfrf hcba gur pnepnfrf bs lbhe vqbyf, naq zl fbhy
funyy noube lbh.

26:31 Naq V jvyy znxr lbhe pvgvrf jnfgr, naq oevat lbhe fnapghnevrf
hagb qrfbyngvba, naq V jvyy abg fzryy gur fnibhe bs lbhe fjrrg bqbhef.

26:32 Naq V jvyy oevat gur ynaq vagb qrfbyngvba: naq lbhe rarzvrf
juvpu qjryy gurerva funyy or nfgbavfurq ng vg.

26:33 Naq V jvyy fpnggre lbh nzbat gur urngura, naq jvyy qenj bhg n
fjbeq nsgre lbh: naq lbhe ynaq funyy or qrfbyngr, naq lbhe pvgvrf
jnfgr.

26:34 Gura funyy gur ynaq rawbl ure fnoonguf, nf ybat nf vg yvrgu
qrfbyngr, naq lr or va lbhe rarzvrf' ynaq; rira gura funyy gur ynaq
erfg, naq rawbl ure fnoonguf.

26:35 Nf ybat nf vg yvrgu qrfbyngr vg funyy erfg; orpnhfr vg qvq abg
erfg va lbhe fnoonguf, jura lr qjryg hcba vg.

26:36 Naq hcba gurz gung ner yrsg nyvir bs lbh V jvyy fraq n snvagarff
vagb gurve urnegf va gur ynaqf bs gurve rarzvrf; naq gur fbhaq bs n
funxra yrns funyy punfr gurz; naq gurl funyy syrr, nf syrrvat sebz n
fjbeq; naq gurl funyy snyy jura abar chefhrgu.

26:37 Naq gurl funyy snyy bar hcba nabgure, nf vg jrer orsber n fjbeq,
jura abar chefhrgu: naq lr funyy unir ab cbjre gb fgnaq orsber lbhe
rarzvrf.

26:38 Naq lr funyy crevfu nzbat gur urngura, naq gur ynaq bs lbhe
rarzvrf funyy rng lbh hc.

26:39 Naq gurl gung ner yrsg bs lbh funyy cvar njnl va gurve vavdhvgl
va lbhe rarzvrf' ynaqf; naq nyfb va gur vavdhvgvrf bs gurve snguref
funyy gurl cvar njnl jvgu gurz.

26:40 Vs gurl funyy pbasrff gurve vavdhvgl, naq gur vavdhvgl bs gurve
snguref, jvgu gurve gerfcnff juvpu gurl gerfcnffrq ntnvafg zr, naq
gung nyfb gurl unir jnyxrq pbagenel hagb zr; 26:41 Naq gung V nyfb
unir jnyxrq pbagenel hagb gurz, naq unir oebhtug gurz vagb gur ynaq bs
gurve rarzvrf; vs gura gurve hapvephzpvfrq urnegf or uhzoyrq, naq gurl
gura npprcg bs gur chavfuzrag bs gurve vavdhvgl: 26:42 Gura jvyy V
erzrzore zl pbiranag jvgu Wnpbo, naq nyfb zl pbiranag jvgu Vfnnp, naq
nyfb zl pbiranag jvgu Noenunz jvyy V erzrzore; naq V jvyy erzrzore gur
ynaq.

26:43 Gur ynaq nyfb funyy or yrsg bs gurz, naq funyy rawbl ure
fnoonguf, juvyr fur yvrgu qrfbyngr jvgubhg gurz: naq gurl funyy npprcg
bs gur chavfuzrag bs gurve vavdhvgl: orpnhfr, rira orpnhfr gurl
qrfcvfrq zl whqtzragf, naq orpnhfr gurve fbhy noubeerq zl fgnghgrf.

26:44 Naq lrg sbe nyy gung, jura gurl or va gur ynaq bs gurve rarzvrf,
V jvyy abg pnfg gurz njnl, arvgure jvyy V noube gurz, gb qrfgebl gurz
hggreyl, naq gb oernx zl pbiranag jvgu gurz: sbe V nz gur YBEQ gurve
Tbq.

26:45 Ohg V jvyy sbe gurve fnxrf erzrzore gur pbiranag bs gurve
naprfgbef, jubz V oebhtug sbegu bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg va gur fvtug
bs gur urngura, gung V zvtug or gurve Tbq: V nz gur YBEQ.

26:46 Gurfr ner gur fgnghgrf naq whqtzragf naq ynjf, juvpu gur YBEQ
znqr orgjrra uvz naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry va zbhag Fvanv ol gur unaq
bs Zbfrf.

27:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 27:2 Fcrnx hagb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq fnl hagb gurz, Jura n zna funyy znxr n
fvathyne ibj, gur crefbaf funyy or sbe gur YBEQ ol gul rfgvzngvba.

27:3 Naq gul rfgvzngvba funyy or bs gur znyr sebz gjragl lrnef byq
rira hagb fvkgl lrnef byq, rira gul rfgvzngvba funyy or svsgl furxryf
bs fvyire, nsgre gur furxry bs gur fnapghnel.

27:4 Naq vs vg or n srznyr, gura gul rfgvzngvba funyy or guvegl
furxryf.

27:5 Naq vs vg or sebz svir lrnef byq rira hagb gjragl lrnef byq, gura
gul rfgvzngvba funyy or bs gur znyr gjragl furxryf, naq sbe gur srznyr
gra furxryf.

27:6 Naq vs vg or sebz n zbagu byq rira hagb svir lrnef byq, gura gul
rfgvzngvba funyy or bs gur znyr svir furxryf bs fvyire, naq sbe gur
srznyr gul rfgvzngvba funyy or guerr furxryf bs fvyire.

27:7 Naq vs vg or sebz fvkgl lrnef byq naq nobir; vs vg or n znyr,
gura gul rfgvzngvba funyy or svsgrra furxryf, naq sbe gur srznyr gra
furxryf.

27:8 Ohg vs ur or cbbere guna gul rfgvzngvba, gura ur funyy cerfrag
uvzfrys orsber gur cevrfg, naq gur cevrfg funyy inyhr uvz; nppbeqvat
gb uvf novyvgl gung ibjrq funyy gur cevrfg inyhr uvz.

27:9 Naq vs vg or n ornfg, jurerbs zra oevat na bssrevat hagb gur
YBEQ, nyy gung nal zna tvirgu bs fhpu hagb gur YBEQ funyy or ubyl.

27:10 Ur funyy abg nygre vg, abe punatr vg, n tbbq sbe n onq, be n onq
sbe n tbbq: naq vs ur funyy ng nyy punatr ornfg sbe ornfg, gura vg naq
gur rkpunatr gurerbs funyy or ubyl.

27:11 Naq vs vg or nal hapyrna ornfg, bs juvpu gurl qb abg bssre n
fnpevsvpr hagb gur YBEQ, gura ur funyy cerfrag gur ornfg orsber gur
cevrfg: 27:12 Naq gur cevrfg funyy inyhr vg, jurgure vg or tbbq be
onq: nf gubh inyhrfg vg, jub neg gur cevrfg, fb funyy vg or.

27:13 Ohg vs ur jvyy ng nyy erqrrz vg, gura ur funyy nqq n svsgu cneg
gurerbs hagb gul rfgvzngvba.

27:14 Naq jura n zna funyy fnapgvsl uvf ubhfr gb or ubyl hagb gur
YBEQ, gura gur cevrfg funyy rfgvzngr vg, jurgure vg or tbbq be onq: nf
gur cevrfg funyy rfgvzngr vg, fb funyy vg fgnaq.

27:15 Naq vs ur gung fnapgvsvrq vg jvyy erqrrz uvf ubhfr, gura ur
funyy nqq gur svsgu cneg bs gur zbarl bs gul rfgvzngvba hagb vg, naq
vg funyy or uvf.

27:16 Naq vs n zna funyy fnapgvsl hagb gur YBEQ fbzr cneg bs n svryq
bs uvf cbffrffvba, gura gul rfgvzngvba funyy or nppbeqvat gb gur frrq
gurerbs: na ubzre bs oneyrl frrq funyy or inyhrq ng svsgl furxryf bs
fvyire.

27:17 Vs ur fnapgvsl uvf svryq sebz gur lrne bs whovyr, nppbeqvat gb
gul rfgvzngvba vg funyy fgnaq.

27:18 Ohg vs ur fnapgvsl uvf svryq nsgre gur whovyr, gura gur cevrfg
funyy erpxba hagb uvz gur zbarl nppbeqvat gb gur lrnef gung erznva,
rira hagb gur lrne bs gur whovyr, naq vg funyy or nongrq sebz gul
rfgvzngvba.

27:19 Naq vs ur gung fnapgvsvrq gur svryq jvyy va nal jvfr erqrrz vg,
gura ur funyy nqq gur svsgu cneg bs gur zbarl bs gul rfgvzngvba hagb
vg, naq vg funyy or nffherq gb uvz.

27:20 Naq vs ur jvyy abg erqrrz gur svryq, be vs ur unir fbyq gur
svryq gb nabgure zna, vg funyy abg or erqrrzrq nal zber.

27:21 Ohg gur svryq, jura vg tbrgu bhg va gur whovyr, funyy or ubyl
hagb gur YBEQ, nf n svryq qribgrq; gur cbffrffvba gurerbs funyy or gur
cevrfg'f.

27:22 Naq vs n zna fnapgvsl hagb gur YBEQ n svryq juvpu ur ungu
obhtug, juvpu vf abg bs gur svryqf bs uvf cbffrffvba; 27:23 Gura gur
cevrfg funyy erpxba hagb uvz gur jbegu bs gul rfgvzngvba, rira hagb
gur lrne bs gur whovyr: naq ur funyy tvir guvar rfgvzngvba va gung
qnl, nf n ubyl guvat hagb gur YBEQ.

27:24 Va gur lrne bs gur whovyr gur svryq funyy erghea hagb uvz bs
jubz vg jnf obhtug, rira gb uvz gb jubz gur cbffrffvba bs gur ynaq qvq
orybat.

27:25 Naq nyy gul rfgvzngvbaf funyy or nppbeqvat gb gur furxry bs gur
fnapghnel: gjragl trenuf funyy or gur furxry.

27:26 Bayl gur svefgyvat bs gur ornfgf, juvpu fubhyq or gur YBEQ'f
svefgyvat, ab zna funyy fnapgvsl vg; jurgure vg or bk, be furrc: vg vf
gur YBEQ'f.

27:27 Naq vs vg or bs na hapyrna ornfg, gura ur funyy erqrrz vg
nppbeqvat gb guvar rfgvzngvba, naq funyy nqq n svsgu cneg bs vg
gurergb: be vs vg or abg erqrrzrq, gura vg funyy or fbyq nppbeqvat gb
gul rfgvzngvba.

27:28 Abgjvgufgnaqvat ab qribgrq guvat, gung n zna funyy qribgr hagb
gur YBEQ bs nyy gung ur ungu, obgu bs zna naq ornfg, naq bs gur svryq
bs uvf cbffrffvba, funyy or fbyq be erqrrzrq: rirel qribgrq guvat vf
zbfg ubyl hagb gur YBEQ.

27:29 Abar qribgrq, juvpu funyy or qribgrq bs zra, funyy or erqrrzrq;
ohg funyy fheryl or chg gb qrngu.

27:30 Naq nyy gur gvgur bs gur ynaq, jurgure bs gur frrq bs gur ynaq,
be bs gur sehvg bs gur gerr, vf gur YBEQ'f: vg vf ubyl hagb gur YBEQ.

27:31 Naq vs n zna jvyy ng nyy erqrrz bhtug bs uvf gvgurf, ur funyy
nqq gurergb gur svsgu cneg gurerbs.

27:32 Naq pbapreavat gur gvgur bs gur ureq, be bs gur sybpx, rira bs
jungfbrire cnffrgu haqre gur ebq, gur gragu funyy or ubyl hagb gur
YBEQ.

27:33 Ur funyy abg frnepu jurgure vg or tbbq be onq, arvgure funyy ur
punatr vg: naq vs ur punatr vg ng nyy, gura obgu vg naq gur punatr
gurerbs funyy or ubyl; vg funyy abg or erqrrzrq.

27:34 Gurfr ner gur pbzznaqzragf, juvpu gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf sbe
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry va zbhag Fvanv.




Gur Sbhegu Obbx bs Zbfrf:  Pnyyrq Ahzoref


1:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf va gur jvyqrearff bs Fvanv, va gur
gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, ba gur svefg qnl bs gur frpbaq zbagu,
va gur frpbaq lrne nsgre gurl jrer pbzr bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg,
fnlvat, 1:2 Gnxr lr gur fhz bs nyy gur pbatertngvba bs gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, nsgre gurve snzvyvrf, ol gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, jvgu gur
ahzore bs gurve anzrf, rirel znyr ol gurve cbyyf; 1:3 Sebz gjragl
lrnef byq naq hcjneq, nyy gung ner noyr gb tb sbegu gb jne va Vfenry:
gubh naq Nneba funyy ahzore gurz ol gurve nezvrf.

1:4 Naq jvgu lbh gurer funyy or n zna bs rirel gevor; rirel bar urnq
bs gur ubhfr bs uvf snguref.

1:5 Naq gurfr ner gur anzrf bs gur zra gung funyy fgnaq jvgu lbh: bs
gur gevor bs Erhora; Ryvmhe gur fba bs Furqrhe.

1:6 Bs Fvzrba; Furyhzvry gur fba bs Mhevfunqqnv.

1:7 Bs Whqnu; Anufuba gur fba bs Nzzvanqno.

1:8 Bs Vffnpune; Argunarry gur fba bs Mhne.

1:9 Bs Mrohyha; Ryvno gur fba bs Uryba.

1:10 Bs gur puvyqera bs Wbfrcu: bs Rcuenvz; Ryvfunzn gur fba bs
Nzzvuhq: bs Znanffru; Tnznyvry gur fba bs Crqnumhe.

1:11 Bs Orawnzva; Novqna gur fba bs Tvqrbav.

1:12 Bs Qna; Nuvrmre gur fba bs Nzzvfunqqnv.

1:13 Bs Nfure; Cntvry gur fba bs Bpena.

1:14 Bs Tnq; Ryvnfncu gur fba bs Qrhry.

1:15 Bs Ancugnyv; Nuven gur fba bs Rana.

1:16 Gurfr jrer gur erabjarq bs gur pbatertngvba, cevaprf bs gur
gevorf bs gurve snguref, urnqf bs gubhfnaqf va Vfenry.

1:17 Naq Zbfrf naq Nneba gbbx gurfr zra juvpu ner rkcerffrq ol gurve
anzrf: 1:18 Naq gurl nffrzoyrq nyy gur pbatertngvba gbtrgure ba gur
svefg qnl bs gur frpbaq zbagu, naq gurl qrpynerq gurve crqvterrf nsgre
gurve snzvyvrf, ol gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore
bs gur anzrf, sebz gjragl lrnef byq naq hcjneq, ol gurve cbyyf.

1:19 Nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf, fb ur ahzorerq gurz va gur
jvyqrearff bs Fvanv.

1:20 Naq gur puvyqera bs Erhora, Vfenry'f ryqrfg fba, ol gurve
trarengvbaf, nsgre gurve snzvyvrf, ol gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref,
nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs gur anzrf, ol gurve cbyyf, rirel znyr sebz
gjragl lrnef byq naq hcjneq, nyy gung jrer noyr gb tb sbegu gb jne;
1:21 Gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, rira bs gur gevor bs Erhora,
jrer sbegl naq fvk gubhfnaq naq svir uhaqerq.

1:22 Bs gur puvyqera bs Fvzrba, ol gurve trarengvbaf, nsgre gurve
snzvyvrf, ol gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs
gurz, nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs gur anzrf, ol gurve cbyyf, rirel znyr
sebz gjragl lrnef byq naq hcjneq, nyy gung jrer noyr gb tb sbegu gb
jne; 1:23 Gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, rira bs gur gevor bs
Fvzrba, jrer svsgl naq avar gubhfnaq naq guerr uhaqerq.

1:24 Bs gur puvyqera bs Tnq, ol gurve trarengvbaf, nsgre gurve
snzvyvrf, ol gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs
gur anzrf, sebz gjragl lrnef byq naq hcjneq, nyy gung jrer noyr gb tb
sbegu gb jne; 1:25 Gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, rira bs gur gevor
bs Tnq, jrer sbegl naq svir gubhfnaq fvk uhaqerq naq svsgl.

1:26 Bs gur puvyqera bs Whqnu, ol gurve trarengvbaf, nsgre gurve
snzvyvrf, ol gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs
gur anzrf, sebz gjragl lrnef byq naq hcjneq, nyy gung jrer noyr gb tb
sbegu gb jne; 1:27 Gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, rira bs gur gevor
bs Whqnu, jrer guerrfpber naq sbhegrra gubhfnaq naq fvk uhaqerq.

1:28 Bs gur puvyqera bs Vffnpune, ol gurve trarengvbaf, nsgre gurve
snzvyvrf, ol gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs
gur anzrf, sebz gjragl lrnef byq naq hcjneq, nyy gung jrer noyr gb tb
sbegu gb jne; 1:29 Gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, rira bs gur gevor
bs Vffnpune, jrer svsgl naq sbhe gubhfnaq naq sbhe uhaqerq.

1:30 Bs gur puvyqera bs Mrohyha, ol gurve trarengvbaf, nsgre gurve
snzvyvrf, ol gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs
gur anzrf, sebz gjragl lrnef byq naq hcjneq, nyy gung jrer noyr gb tb
sbegu gb jne; 1:31 Gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, rira bs gur gevor
bs Mrohyha, jrer svsgl naq frira gubhfnaq naq sbhe uhaqerq.

1:32 Bs gur puvyqera bs Wbfrcu, anzryl, bs gur puvyqera bs Rcuenvz, ol
gurve trarengvbaf, nsgre gurve snzvyvrf, ol gur ubhfr bs gurve
snguref, nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs gur anzrf, sebz gjragl lrnef byq
naq hcjneq, nyy gung jrer noyr gb tb sbegu gb jne; 1:33 Gubfr gung
jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, rira bs gur gevor bs Rcuenvz, jrer sbegl
gubhfnaq naq svir uhaqerq.

1:34 Bs gur puvyqera bs Znanffru, ol gurve trarengvbaf, nsgre gurve
snzvyvrf, ol gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs
gur anzrf, sebz gjragl lrnef byq naq hcjneq, nyy gung jrer noyr gb tb
sbegu gb jne; 1:35 Gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, rira bs gur gevor
bs Znanffru, jrer guvegl naq gjb gubhfnaq naq gjb uhaqerq.

1:36 Bs gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva, ol gurve trarengvbaf, nsgre gurve
snzvyvrf, ol gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs
gur anzrf, sebz gjragl lrnef byq naq hcjneq, nyy gung jrer noyr gb tb
sbegu gb jne; 1:37 Gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, rira bs gur gevor
bs Orawnzva, jrer guvegl naq svir gubhfnaq naq sbhe uhaqerq.

1:38 Bs gur puvyqera bs Qna, ol gurve trarengvbaf, nsgre gurve
snzvyvrf, ol gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs
gur anzrf, sebz gjragl lrnef byq naq hcjneq, nyy gung jrer noyr gb tb
sbegu gb jne; 1:39 Gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, rira bs gur gevor
bs Qna, jrer guerrfpber naq gjb gubhfnaq naq frira uhaqerq.

1:40 Bs gur puvyqera bs Nfure, ol gurve trarengvbaf, nsgre gurve
snzvyvrf, ol gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs
gur anzrf, sebz gjragl lrnef byq naq hcjneq, nyy gung jrer noyr gb tb
sbegu gb jne; 1:41 Gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, rira bs gur gevor
bs Nfure, jrer sbegl naq bar gubhfnaq naq svir uhaqerq.

1:42 Bs gur puvyqera bs Ancugnyv, guebhtubhg gurve trarengvbaf, nsgre
gurve snzvyvrf, ol gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore
bs gur anzrf, sebz gjragl lrnef byq naq hcjneq, nyy gung jrer noyr gb
tb sbegu gb jne; 1:43 Gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, rira bs gur
gevor bs Ancugnyv, jrer svsgl naq guerr gubhfnaq naq sbhe uhaqerq.

1:44 Gurfr ner gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq, juvpu Zbfrf naq Nneba
ahzorerq, naq gur cevaprf bs Vfenry, orvat gjryir zra: rnpu bar jnf
sbe gur ubhfr bs uvf snguref.

1:45 Fb jrer nyy gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry,
ol gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, sebz gjragl lrnef byq naq hcjneq, nyy
gung jrer noyr gb tb sbegu gb jne va Vfenry; 1:46 Rira nyy gurl gung
jrer ahzorerq jrer fvk uhaqerq gubhfnaq naq guerr gubhfnaq naq svir
uhaqerq naq svsgl.

1:47 Ohg gur Yrivgrf nsgre gur gevor bs gurve snguref jrer abg
ahzorerq nzbat gurz.

1:48 Sbe gur YBEQ unq fcbxra hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 1:49 Bayl gubh funyg
abg ahzore gur gevor bs Yriv, arvgure gnxr gur fhz bs gurz nzbat gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry: 1:50 Ohg gubh funyg nccbvag gur Yrivgrf bire gur
gnoreanpyr bs grfgvzbal, naq bire nyy gur irffryf gurerbs, naq bire
nyy guvatf gung orybat gb vg: gurl funyy orne gur gnoreanpyr, naq nyy
gur irffryf gurerbs; naq gurl funyy zvavfgre hagb vg, naq funyy rapnzc
ebhaq nobhg gur gnoreanpyr.

1:51 Naq jura gur gnoreanpyr frggrgu sbejneq, gur Yrivgrf funyy gnxr
vg qbja: naq jura gur gnoreanpyr vf gb or cvgpurq, gur Yrivgrf funyy
frg vg hc: naq gur fgenatre gung pbzrgu avtu funyy or chg gb qrngu.

1:52 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry funyy cvgpu gurve gragf, rirel zna ol
uvf bja pnzc, naq rirel zna ol uvf bja fgnaqneq, guebhtubhg gurve
ubfgf.

1:53 Ohg gur Yrivgrf funyy cvgpu ebhaq nobhg gur gnoreanpyr bs
grfgvzbal, gung gurer or ab jengu hcba gur pbatertngvba bs gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry: naq gur Yrivgrf funyy xrrc gur punetr bs gur
gnoreanpyr bs grfgvzbal.

1:54 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq nppbeqvat gb nyy gung gur YBEQ
pbzznaqrq Zbfrf, fb qvq gurl.

2:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf naq hagb Nneba, fnlvat, 2:2 Rirel
zna bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry funyy cvgpu ol uvf bja fgnaqneq, jvgu
gur rafvta bs gurve sngure'f ubhfr: sne bss nobhg gur gnoreanpyr bs
gur pbatertngvba funyy gurl cvgpu.

2:3 Naq ba gur rnfg fvqr gbjneq gur evfvat bs gur fha funyy gurl bs
gur fgnaqneq bs gur pnzc bs Whqnu cvgpu guebhtubhg gurve nezvrf: naq
Anufuba gur fba bs Nzzvanqno funyy or pncgnva bs gur puvyqera bs
Whqnu.

2:4 Naq uvf ubfg, naq gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, jrer
guerrfpber naq sbhegrra gubhfnaq naq fvk uhaqerq.

2:5 Naq gubfr gung qb cvgpu arkg hagb uvz funyy or gur gevor bs
Vffnpune: naq Argunarry gur fba bs Mhne funyy or pncgnva bs gur
puvyqera bs Vffnpune.

2:6 Naq uvf ubfg, naq gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq gurerbs, jrer svsgl naq
sbhe gubhfnaq naq sbhe uhaqerq.

2:7 Gura gur gevor bs Mrohyha: naq Ryvno gur fba bs Uryba funyy or
pncgnva bs gur puvyqera bs Mrohyha.

2:8 Naq uvf ubfg, naq gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq gurerbs, jrer svsgl naq
frira gubhfnaq naq sbhe uhaqerq.

2:9 Nyy gung jrer ahzorerq va gur pnzc bs Whqnu jrer na uhaqerq
gubhfnaq naq sbhefpber gubhfnaq naq fvk gubhfnaq naq sbhe uhaqerq,
guebhtubhg gurve nezvrf. Gurfr funyy svefg frg sbegu.

2:10 Ba gur fbhgu fvqr funyy or gur fgnaqneq bs gur pnzc bs Erhora
nppbeqvat gb gurve nezvrf: naq gur pncgnva bs gur puvyqera bs Erhora
funyy or Ryvmhe gur fba bs Furqrhe.

2:11 Naq uvf ubfg, naq gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq gurerbs, jrer sbegl
naq fvk gubhfnaq naq svir uhaqerq.

2:12 Naq gubfr juvpu cvgpu ol uvz funyy or gur gevor bs Fvzrba: naq
gur pncgnva bs gur puvyqera bs Fvzrba funyy or Furyhzvry gur fba bs
Mhevfunqqnv.

2:13 Naq uvf ubfg, naq gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, jrer svsgl
naq avar gubhfnaq naq guerr uhaqerq.

2:14 Gura gur gevor bs Tnq: naq gur pncgnva bs gur fbaf bs Tnq funyy
or Ryvnfncu gur fba bs Erhry.

2:15 Naq uvf ubfg, naq gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, jrer sbegl
naq svir gubhfnaq naq fvk uhaqerq naq svsgl.

2:16 Nyy gung jrer ahzorerq va gur pnzc bs Erhora jrer na uhaqerq
gubhfnaq naq svsgl naq bar gubhfnaq naq sbhe uhaqerq naq svsgl,
guebhtubhg gurve nezvrf. Naq gurl funyy frg sbegu va gur frpbaq enax.

2:17 Gura gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba funyy frg sbejneq jvgu
gur pnzc bs gur Yrivgrf va gur zvqfg bs gur pnzc: nf gurl rapnzc, fb
funyy gurl frg sbejneq, rirel zna va uvf cynpr ol gurve fgnaqneqf.

2:18 Ba gur jrfg fvqr funyy or gur fgnaqneq bs gur pnzc bs Rcuenvz
nppbeqvat gb gurve nezvrf: naq gur pncgnva bs gur fbaf bs Rcuenvz
funyy or Ryvfunzn gur fba bs Nzzvuhq.

2:19 Naq uvf ubfg, naq gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, jrer sbegl
gubhfnaq naq svir uhaqerq.

2:20 Naq ol uvz funyy or gur gevor bs Znanffru: naq gur pncgnva bs gur
puvyqera bs Znanffru funyy or Tnznyvry gur fba bs Crqnumhe.

2:21 Naq uvf ubfg, naq gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, jrer guvegl
naq gjb gubhfnaq naq gjb uhaqerq.

2:22 Gura gur gevor bs Orawnzva: naq gur pncgnva bs gur fbaf bs
Orawnzva funyy or Novqna gur fba bs Tvqrbav.

2:23 Naq uvf ubfg, naq gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, jrer guvegl
naq svir gubhfnaq naq sbhe uhaqerq.

2:24 Nyy gung jrer ahzorerq bs gur pnzc bs Rcuenvz jrer na uhaqerq
gubhfnaq naq rvtug gubhfnaq naq na uhaqerq, guebhtubhg gurve nezvrf.
Naq gurl funyy tb sbejneq va gur guveq enax.

2:25 Gur fgnaqneq bs gur pnzc bs Qna funyy or ba gur abegu fvqr ol
gurve nezvrf: naq gur pncgnva bs gur puvyqera bs Qna funyy or Nuvrmre
gur fba bs Nzzvfunqqnv.

2:26 Naq uvf ubfg, naq gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, jrer
guerrfpber naq gjb gubhfnaq naq frira uhaqerq.

2:27 Naq gubfr gung rapnzc ol uvz funyy or gur gevor bs Nfure: naq gur
pncgnva bs gur puvyqera bs Nfure funyy or Cntvry gur fba bs Bpena.

2:28 Naq uvf ubfg, naq gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, jrer sbegl
naq bar gubhfnaq naq svir uhaqerq.

2:29 Gura gur gevor bs Ancugnyv: naq gur pncgnva bs gur puvyqera bs
Ancugnyv funyy or Nuven gur fba bs Rana.

2:30 Naq uvf ubfg, naq gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, jrer svsgl
naq guerr gubhfnaq naq sbhe uhaqerq.

2:31 Nyy gurl gung jrer ahzorerq va gur pnzc bs Qna jrer na uhaqerq
gubhfnaq naq svsgl naq frira gubhfnaq naq fvk uhaqerq. Gurl funyy tb
uvaqzbfg jvgu gurve fgnaqneqf.

2:32 Gurfr ner gubfr juvpu jrer ahzorerq bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry ol
gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref: nyy gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gur pnzcf
guebhtubhg gurve ubfgf jrer fvk uhaqerq gubhfnaq naq guerr gubhfnaq
naq svir uhaqerq naq svsgl.

2:33 Ohg gur Yrivgrf jrer abg ahzorerq nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry;
nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

2:34 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq nppbeqvat gb nyy gung gur YBEQ
pbzznaqrq Zbfrf: fb gurl cvgpurq ol gurve fgnaqneqf, naq fb gurl frg
sbejneq, rirel bar nsgre gurve snzvyvrf, nppbeqvat gb gur ubhfr bs
gurve snguref.

3:1 Gurfr nyfb ner gur trarengvbaf bs Nneba naq Zbfrf va gur qnl gung
gur YBEQ fcnxr jvgu Zbfrf va zbhag Fvanv.

3:2 Naq gurfr ner gur anzrf bs gur fbaf bs Nneba; Anqno gur svefgobea,
naq Novuh, Ryrnmne, naq Vgunzne.

3:3 Gurfr ner gur anzrf bs gur fbaf bs Nneba, gur cevrfgf juvpu jrer
nabvagrq, jubz ur pbafrpengrq gb zvavfgre va gur cevrfg'f bssvpr.

3:4 Naq Anqno naq Novuh qvrq orsber gur YBEQ, jura gurl bssrerq
fgenatr sver orsber gur YBEQ, va gur jvyqrearff bs Fvanv, naq gurl unq
ab puvyqera: naq Ryrnmne naq Vgunzne zvavfgrerq va gur cevrfg'f bssvpr
va gur fvtug bs Nneba gurve sngure.

3:5 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 3:6 Oevat gur gevor bs Yriv
arne, naq cerfrag gurz orsber Nneba gur cevrfg, gung gurl znl zvavfgre
hagb uvz.

3:7 Naq gurl funyy xrrc uvf punetr, naq gur punetr bs gur jubyr
pbatertngvba orsber gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, gb qb gur
freivpr bs gur gnoreanpyr.

3:8 Naq gurl funyy xrrc nyy gur vafgehzragf bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba, naq gur punetr bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, gb qb gur
freivpr bs gur gnoreanpyr.

3:9 Naq gubh funyg tvir gur Yrivgrf hagb Nneba naq gb uvf fbaf: gurl
ner jubyyl tvira hagb uvz bhg bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

3:10 Naq gubh funyg nccbvag Nneba naq uvf fbaf, naq gurl funyy jnvg ba
gurve cevrfg'f bssvpr: naq gur fgenatre gung pbzrgu avtu funyy or chg
gb qrngu.

3:11 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 3:12 Naq V, orubyq, V unir
gnxra gur Yrivgrf sebz nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry vafgrnq bs nyy gur
svefgobea gung bcrargu gur zngevk nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry:
gurersber gur Yrivgrf funyy or zvar; 3:13 Orpnhfr nyy gur svefgobea
ner zvar; sbe ba gur qnl gung V fzbgr nyy gur svefgobea va gur ynaq bs
Rtlcg V unyybjrq hagb zr nyy gur svefgobea va Vfenry, obgu zna naq
ornfg: zvar funyy gurl or: V nz gur YBEQ.

3:14 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf va gur jvyqrearff bs Fvanv, fnlvat,
3:15 Ahzore gur puvyqera bs Yriv nsgre gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, ol
gurve snzvyvrf: rirel znyr sebz n zbagu byq naq hcjneq funyg gubh
ahzore gurz.

3:16 Naq Zbfrf ahzorerq gurz nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ, nf ur
jnf pbzznaqrq.

3:17 Naq gurfr jrer gur fbaf bs Yriv ol gurve anzrf; Trefuba, naq
Xbungu, naq Zrenev.

3:18 Naq gurfr ner gur anzrf bs gur fbaf bs Trefuba ol gurve snzvyvrf;
Yvoav, naq Fuvzrv.

3:19 Naq gur fbaf bs Xbungu ol gurve snzvyvrf; Nzenz, naq Vmrune,
Uroeba, naq Hmmvry.

3:20 Naq gur fbaf bs Zrenev ol gurve snzvyvrf; Znuyv, naq Zhfuv. Gurfr
ner gur snzvyvrf bs gur Yrivgrf nppbeqvat gb gur ubhfr bs gurve
snguref.

3:21 Bs Trefuba jnf gur snzvyl bs gur Yvoavgrf, naq gur snzvyl bs gur
Fuvzvgrf: gurfr ner gur snzvyvrf bs gur Trefubavgrf.

3:22 Gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs nyy
gur znyrf, sebz n zbagu byq naq hcjneq, rira gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq
bs gurz jrer frira gubhfnaq naq svir uhaqerq.

3:23 Gur snzvyvrf bs gur Trefubavgrf funyy cvgpu oruvaq gur gnoreanpyr
jrfgjneq.

3:24 Naq gur puvrs bs gur ubhfr bs gur sngure bs gur Trefubavgrf funyy
or Ryvnfncu gur fba bs Ynry.

3:25 Naq gur punetr bs gur fbaf bs Trefuba va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba funyy or gur gnoreanpyr, naq gur grag, gur pbirevat
gurerbs, naq gur unatvat sbe gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba, 3:26 Naq gur unatvatf bs gur pbheg, naq gur phegnva sbe
gur qbbe bs gur pbheg, juvpu vf ol gur gnoreanpyr, naq ol gur nygne
ebhaq nobhg, naq gur pbeqf bs vg sbe nyy gur freivpr gurerbs.

3:27 Naq bs Xbungu jnf gur snzvyl bs gur Nzenzvgrf, naq gur snzvyl bs
gur Vmrunevgrf, naq gur snzvyl bs gur Uroebavgrf, naq gur snzvyl bs
gur Hmmvryvgrf: gurfr ner gur snzvyvrf bs gur Xbunguvgrf.

3:28 Va gur ahzore bs nyy gur znyrf, sebz n zbagu byq naq hcjneq, jrer
rvtug gubhfnaq naq fvk uhaqerq, xrrcvat gur punetr bs gur fnapghnel.

3:29 Gur snzvyvrf bs gur fbaf bs Xbungu funyy cvgpu ba gur fvqr bs gur
gnoreanpyr fbhgujneq.

3:30 Naq gur puvrs bs gur ubhfr bs gur sngure bs gur snzvyvrf bs gur
Xbunguvgrf funyy or Ryvmncuna gur fba bs Hmmvry.

3:31 Naq gurve punetr funyy or gur nex, naq gur gnoyr, naq gur
pnaqyrfgvpx, naq gur nygnef, naq gur irffryf bs gur fnapghnel
jurerjvgu gurl zvavfgre, naq gur unatvat, naq nyy gur freivpr gurerbs.

3:32 Naq Ryrnmne gur fba bs Nneba gur cevrfg funyy or puvrs bire gur
puvrs bs gur Yrivgrf, naq unir gur birefvtug bs gurz gung xrrc gur
punetr bs gur fnapghnel.

3:33 Bs Zrenev jnf gur snzvyl bs gur Znuyvgrf, naq gur snzvyl bs gur
Zhfuvgrf: gurfr ner gur snzvyvrf bs Zrenev.

3:34 Naq gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs
nyy gur znyrf, sebz n zbagu byq naq hcjneq, jrer fvk gubhfnaq naq gjb
uhaqerq.

3:35 Naq gur puvrs bs gur ubhfr bs gur sngure bs gur snzvyvrf bs
Zrenev jnf Mhevry gur fba bs Novunvy: gurfr funyy cvgpu ba gur fvqr bs
gur gnoreanpyr abegujneq.

3:36 Naq haqre gur phfgbql naq punetr bs gur fbaf bs Zrenev funyy or
gur obneqf bs gur gnoreanpyr, naq gur onef gurerbs, naq gur cvyynef
gurerbs, naq gur fbpxrgf gurerbs, naq nyy gur irffryf gurerbs, naq nyy
gung freirgu gurergb, 3:37 Naq gur cvyynef bs gur pbheg ebhaq nobhg,
naq gurve fbpxrgf, naq gurve cvaf, naq gurve pbeqf.

3:38 Ohg gubfr gung rapnzc orsber gur gnoreanpyr gbjneq gur rnfg, rira
orsber gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba rnfgjneq, funyy or Zbfrf,
naq Nneba naq uvf fbaf, xrrcvat gur punetr bs gur fnapghnel sbe gur
punetr bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry; naq gur fgenatre gung pbzrgu avtu
funyy or chg gb qrngu.

3:39 Nyy gung jrer ahzorerq bs gur Yrivgrf, juvpu Zbfrf naq Nneba
ahzorerq ng gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ, guebhtubhg gurve snzvyvrf,
nyy gur znyrf sebz n zbagu byq naq hcjneq, jrer gjragl naq gjb
gubhfnaq.

3:40 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Ahzore nyy gur svefgobea bs gur
znyrf bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry sebz n zbagu byq naq hcjneq, naq gnxr
gur ahzore bs gurve anzrf.

3:41 Naq gubh funyg gnxr gur Yrivgrf sbe zr (V nz gur YBEQ) vafgrnq bs
nyy gur svefgobea nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry; naq gur pnggyr bs gur
Yrivgrf vafgrnq bs nyy gur svefgyvatf nzbat gur pnggyr bs gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry.

3:42 Naq Zbfrf ahzorerq, nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq uvz, nyy gur svefgobea
nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

3:43 Naq nyy gur svefgobea znyrf ol gur ahzore bs anzrf, sebz n zbagu
byq naq hcjneq, bs gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, jrer gjragl naq
gjb gubhfnaq gjb uhaqerq naq guerrfpber naq guvegrra.

3:44 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 3:45 Gnxr gur Yrivgrf
vafgrnq bs nyy gur svefgobea nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq gur
pnggyr bs gur Yrivgrf vafgrnq bs gurve pnggyr; naq gur Yrivgrf funyy
or zvar: V nz gur YBEQ.

3:46 Naq sbe gubfr gung ner gb or erqrrzrq bs gur gjb uhaqerq naq
guerrfpber naq guvegrra bs gur svefgobea bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry,
juvpu ner zber guna gur Yrivgrf; 3:47 Gubh funyg rira gnxr svir
furxryf ncvrpr ol gur cbyy, nsgre gur furxry bs gur fnapghnel funyg
gubh gnxr gurz: (gur furxry vf gjragl trenuf:) 3:48 Naq gubh funyg
tvir gur zbarl, jurerjvgu gur bqq ahzore bs gurz vf gb or erqrrzrq,
hagb Nneba naq gb uvf fbaf.

3:49 Naq Zbfrf gbbx gur erqrzcgvba zbarl bs gurz gung jrer bire naq
nobir gurz gung jrer erqrrzrq ol gur Yrivgrf: 3:50 Bs gur svefgobea bs
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry gbbx ur gur zbarl; n gubhfnaq guerr uhaqerq naq
guerrfpber naq svir furxryf, nsgre gur furxry bs gur fnapghnel: 3:51
Naq Zbfrf tnir gur zbarl bs gurz gung jrer erqrrzrq hagb Nneba naq gb
uvf fbaf, nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ, nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq
Zbfrf.

4:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf naq hagb Nneba, fnlvat, 4:2 Gnxr gur
fhz bs gur fbaf bs Xbungu sebz nzbat gur fbaf bs Yriv, nsgre gurve
snzvyvrf, ol gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, 4:3 Sebz guvegl lrnef byq naq
hcjneq rira hagvy svsgl lrnef byq, nyy gung ragre vagb gur ubfg, gb qb
gur jbex va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba.

4:4 Guvf funyy or gur freivpr bs gur fbaf bs Xbungu va gur gnoreanpyr
bs gur pbatertngvba, nobhg gur zbfg ubyl guvatf: 4:5 Naq jura gur pnzc
frggrgu sbejneq, Nneba funyy pbzr, naq uvf fbaf, naq gurl funyy gnxr
qbja gur pbirevat invy, naq pbire gur nex bs grfgvzbal jvgu vg: 4:6
Naq funyy chg gurerba gur pbirevat bs onqtref' fxvaf, naq funyy fcernq
bire vg n pybgu jubyyl bs oyhr, naq funyy chg va gur fgnirf gurerbs.

4:7 Naq hcba gur gnoyr bs furjoernq gurl funyy fcernq n pybgu bs oyhr,
naq chg gurerba gur qvfurf, naq gur fcbbaf, naq gur objyf, naq pbiref
gb pbire jvguny: naq gur pbagvahny oernq funyy or gurerba: 4:8 Naq
gurl funyy fcernq hcba gurz n pybgu bs fpneyrg, naq pbire gur fnzr
jvgu n pbirevat bs onqtref' fxvaf, naq funyy chg va gur fgnirf
gurerbs.

4:9 Naq gurl funyy gnxr n pybgu bs oyhr, naq pbire gur pnaqyrfgvpx bs
gur yvtug, naq uvf ynzcf, naq uvf gbatf, naq uvf fahssqvfurf, naq nyy
gur bvy irffryf gurerbs, jurerjvgu gurl zvavfgre hagb vg: 4:10 Naq
gurl funyy chg vg naq nyy gur irffryf gurerbs jvguva n pbirevat bs
onqtref' fxvaf, naq funyy chg vg hcba n one.

4:11 Naq hcba gur tbyqra nygne gurl funyy fcernq n pybgu bs oyhr, naq
pbire vg jvgu n pbirevat bs onqtref' fxvaf, naq funyy chg gb gur
fgnirf gurerbs: 4:12 Naq gurl funyy gnxr nyy gur vafgehzragf bs
zvavfgel, jurerjvgu gurl zvavfgre va gur fnapghnel, naq chg gurz va n
pybgu bs oyhr, naq pbire gurz jvgu n pbirevat bs onqtref' fxvaf, naq
funyy chg gurz ba n one: 4:13 Naq gurl funyy gnxr njnl gur nfurf sebz
gur nygne, naq fcernq n checyr pybgu gurerba: 4:14 Naq gurl funyy chg
hcba vg nyy gur irffryf gurerbs, jurerjvgu gurl zvavfgre nobhg vg,
rira gur prafref, gur syrfuubbxf, naq gur fubiryf, naq gur onfbaf, nyy
gur irffryf bs gur nygne; naq gurl funyy fcernq hcba vg n pbirevat bs
onqtref' fxvaf, naq chg gb gur fgnirf bs vg.

4:15 Naq jura Nneba naq uvf fbaf unir znqr na raq bs pbirevat gur
fnapghnel, naq nyy gur irffryf bs gur fnapghnel, nf gur pnzc vf gb frg
sbejneq; nsgre gung, gur fbaf bs Xbungu funyy pbzr gb orne vg: ohg
gurl funyy abg gbhpu nal ubyl guvat, yrfg gurl qvr. Gurfr guvatf ner
gur oheqra bs gur fbaf bs Xbungu va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba.

4:16 Naq gb gur bssvpr bs Ryrnmne gur fba bs Nneba gur cevrfg
cregnvargu gur bvy sbe gur yvtug, naq gur fjrrg vaprafr, naq gur qnvyl
zrng bssrevat, naq gur nabvagvat bvy, naq gur birefvtug bs nyy gur
gnoreanpyr, naq bs nyy gung gurerva vf, va gur fnapghnel, naq va gur
irffryf gurerbs.

4:17 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf naq hagb Nneba fnlvat, 4:18 Phg lr
abg bss gur gevor bs gur snzvyvrf bs gur Xbunguvgrf sebz nzbat gur
Yrivgrf: 4:19 Ohg guhf qb hagb gurz, gung gurl znl yvir, naq abg qvr,
jura gurl nccebnpu hagb gur zbfg ubyl guvatf: Nneba naq uvf fbaf funyy
tb va, naq nccbvag gurz rirel bar gb uvf freivpr naq gb uvf oheqra:
4:20 Ohg gurl funyy abg tb va gb frr jura gur ubyl guvatf ner pbirerq,
yrfg gurl qvr.

4:21 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 4:22 Gnxr nyfb gur fhz bs
gur fbaf bs Trefuba, guebhtubhg gur ubhfrf bs gurve snguref, ol gurve
snzvyvrf; 4:23 Sebz guvegl lrnef byq naq hcjneq hagvy svsgl lrnef byq
funyg gubh ahzore gurz; nyy gung ragre va gb cresbez gur freivpr, gb
qb gur jbex va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba.

4:24 Guvf vf gur freivpr bs gur snzvyvrf bs gur Trefubavgrf, gb freir,
naq sbe oheqraf: 4:25 Naq gurl funyy orne gur phegnvaf bs gur
gnoreanpyr, naq gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, uvf pbirevat, naq
gur pbirevat bs gur onqtref' fxvaf gung vf nobir hcba vg, naq gur
unatvat sbe gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, 4:26 Naq
gur unatvatf bs gur pbheg, naq gur unatvat sbe gur qbbe bs gur tngr bs
gur pbheg, juvpu vf ol gur gnoreanpyr naq ol gur nygne ebhaq nobhg,
naq gurve pbeqf, naq nyy gur vafgehzragf bs gurve freivpr, naq nyy
gung vf znqr sbe gurz: fb funyy gurl freir.

4:27 Ng gur nccbvagzrag bs Nneba naq uvf fbaf funyy or nyy gur freivpr
bs gur fbaf bs gur Trefubavgrf, va nyy gurve oheqraf, naq va nyy gurve
freivpr: naq lr funyy nccbvag hagb gurz va punetr nyy gurve oheqraf.

4:28 Guvf vf gur freivpr bs gur snzvyvrf bs gur fbaf bs Trefuba va gur
gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba: naq gurve punetr funyy or haqre gur
unaq bs Vgunzne gur fba bs Nneba gur cevrfg.

4:29 Nf sbe gur fbaf bs Zrenev, gubh funyg ahzore gurz nsgre gurve
snzvyvrf, ol gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref; 4:30 Sebz guvegl lrnef byq
naq hcjneq rira hagb svsgl lrnef byq funyg gubh ahzore gurz, rirel bar
gung ragrergu vagb gur freivpr, gb qb gur jbex bs gur gnoreanpyr bs
gur pbatertngvba.

4:31 Naq guvf vf gur punetr bs gurve oheqra, nppbeqvat gb nyy gurve
freivpr va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba; gur obneqf bs gur
gnoreanpyr, naq gur onef gurerbs, naq gur cvyynef gurerbs, naq fbpxrgf
gurerbs, 4:32 Naq gur cvyynef bs gur pbheg ebhaq nobhg, naq gurve
fbpxrgf, naq gurve cvaf, naq gurve pbeqf, jvgu nyy gurve vafgehzragf,
naq jvgu nyy gurve freivpr: naq ol anzr lr funyy erpxba gur
vafgehzragf bs gur punetr bs gurve oheqra.

4:33 Guvf vf gur freivpr bs gur snzvyvrf bs gur fbaf bs Zrenev,
nppbeqvat gb nyy gurve freivpr, va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba,
haqre gur unaq bs Vgunzne gur fba bs Nneba gur cevrfg.

4:34 Naq Zbfrf naq Nneba naq gur puvrs bs gur pbatertngvba ahzorerq
gur fbaf bs gur Xbunguvgrf nsgre gurve snzvyvrf, naq nsgre gur ubhfr
bs gurve snguref, 4:35 Sebz guvegl lrnef byq naq hcjneq rira hagb
svsgl lrnef byq, rirel bar gung ragrergu vagb gur freivpr, sbe gur
jbex va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba: 4:36 Naq gubfr gung jrer
ahzorerq bs gurz ol gurve snzvyvrf jrer gjb gubhfnaq frira uhaqerq naq
svsgl.

4:37 Gurfr jrer gurl gung jrer ahzorerq bs gur snzvyvrf bs gur
Xbunguvgrf, nyy gung zvtug qb freivpr va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba, juvpu Zbfrf naq Nneba qvq ahzore nppbeqvat gb gur
pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ ol gur unaq bs Zbfrf.

4:38 Naq gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gur fbaf bs Trefuba, guebhtubhg
gurve snzvyvrf, naq ol gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, 4:39 Sebz guvegl
lrnef byq naq hcjneq rira hagb svsgl lrnef byq, rirel bar gung
ragrergu vagb gur freivpr, sbe gur jbex va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba, 4:40 Rira gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, guebhtubhg
gurve snzvyvrf, ol gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, jrer gjb gubhfnaq naq
fvk uhaqerq naq guvegl.

4:41 Gurfr ner gurl gung jrer ahzorerq bs gur snzvyvrf bs gur fbaf bs
Trefuba, bs nyy gung zvtug qb freivpr va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba, jubz Zbfrf naq Nneba qvq ahzore nppbeqvat gb gur
pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ.

4:42 Naq gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gur snzvyvrf bs gur fbaf bs
Zrenev, guebhtubhg gurve snzvyvrf, ol gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, 4:43
Sebz guvegl lrnef byq naq hcjneq rira hagb svsgl lrnef byq, rirel bar
gung ragrergu vagb gur freivpr, sbe gur jbex va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba, 4:44 Rira gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz nsgre gurve
snzvyvrf, jrer guerr gubhfnaq naq gjb uhaqerq.

4:45 Gurfr or gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gur snzvyvrf bs gur fbaf bs
Zrenev, jubz Zbfrf naq Nneba ahzorerq nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs gur
YBEQ ol gur unaq bs Zbfrf.

4:46 Nyy gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gur Yrivgrf, jubz Zbfrf naq Nneba
naq gur puvrs bs Vfenry ahzorerq, nsgre gurve snzvyvrf, naq nsgre gur
ubhfr bs gurve snguref, 4:47 Sebz guvegl lrnef byq naq hcjneq rira
hagb svsgl lrnef byq, rirel bar gung pnzr gb qb gur freivpr bs gur
zvavfgel, naq gur freivpr bs gur oheqra va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba.

4:48 Rira gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, jrer rvtug gubhfnaq naq
svir uhaqerq naq sbhefpber, 4:49 Nppbeqvat gb gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur
YBEQ gurl jrer ahzorerq ol gur unaq bs Zbfrf, rirel bar nppbeqvat gb
uvf freivpr, naq nppbeqvat gb uvf oheqra: guhf jrer gurl ahzorerq bs
uvz, nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

5:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 5:2 Pbzznaq gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, gung gurl chg bhg bs gur pnzc rirel yrcre, naq rirel bar gung
ungu na vffhr, naq jubfbrire vf qrsvyrq ol gur qrnq: 5:3 Obgu znyr naq
srznyr funyy lr chg bhg, jvgubhg gur pnzc funyy lr chg gurz; gung gurl
qrsvyr abg gurve pnzcf, va gur zvqfg jurerbs V qjryy.

5:4 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq fb, naq chg gurz bhg jvgubhg gur
pnzc: nf gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fb qvq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

5:5 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 5:6 Fcrnx hagb gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry, Jura n zna be jbzna funyy pbzzvg nal fva gung zra pbzzvg,
gb qb n gerfcnff ntnvafg gur YBEQ, naq gung crefba or thvygl; 5:7 Gura
gurl funyy pbasrff gurve fva juvpu gurl unir qbar: naq ur funyy
erpbzcrafr uvf gerfcnff jvgu gur cevapvcny gurerbs, naq nqq hagb vg
gur svsgu cneg gurerbs, naq tvir vg hagb uvz ntnvafg jubz ur ungu
gerfcnffrq.

5:8 Ohg vs gur zna unir ab xvafzna gb erpbzcrafr gur gerfcnff hagb,
yrg gur gerfcnff or erpbzcrafrq hagb gur YBEQ, rira gb gur cevrfg;
orfvqr gur enz bs gur ngbarzrag, jurerol na ngbarzrag funyy or znqr
sbe uvz.

5:9 Naq rirel bssrevat bs nyy gur ubyl guvatf bs gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, juvpu gurl oevat hagb gur cevrfg, funyy or uvf.

5:10 Naq rirel zna'f unyybjrq guvatf funyy or uvf: jungfbrire nal zna
tvirgu gur cevrfg, vg funyy or uvf.

5:11 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 5:12 Fcrnx hagb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq fnl hagb gurz, Vs nal zna'f jvsr tb nfvqr, naq
pbzzvg n gerfcnff ntnvafg uvz, 5:13 Naq n zna yvr jvgu ure pneanyyl,
naq vg or uvq sebz gur rlrf bs ure uhfonaq, naq or xrcg pybfr, naq fur
or qrsvyrq, naq gurer or ab jvgarff ntnvafg ure, arvgure fur or gnxra
jvgu gur znaare; 5:14 Naq gur fcvevg bs wrnybhfl pbzr hcba uvz, naq ur
or wrnybhf bs uvf jvsr, naq fur or qrsvyrq: be vs gur fcvevg bs
wrnybhfl pbzr hcba uvz, naq ur or wrnybhf bs uvf jvsr, naq fur or abg
qrsvyrq: 5:15 Gura funyy gur zna oevat uvf jvsr hagb gur cevrfg, naq
ur funyy oevat ure bssrevat sbe ure, gur gragu cneg bs na rcunu bs
oneyrl zrny; ur funyy cbhe ab bvy hcba vg, abe chg senaxvaprafr
gurerba; sbe vg vf na bssrevat bs wrnybhfl, na bssrevat bs zrzbevny,
oevatvat vavdhvgl gb erzrzoenapr.

5:16 Naq gur cevrfg funyy oevat ure arne, naq frg ure orsber gur YBEQ:
5:17 Naq gur cevrfg funyy gnxr ubyl jngre va na rnegura irffry; naq bs
gur qhfg gung vf va gur sybbe bs gur gnoreanpyr gur cevrfg funyy gnxr,
naq chg vg vagb gur jngre: 5:18 Naq gur cevrfg funyy frg gur jbzna
orsber gur YBEQ, naq hapbire gur jbzna'f urnq, naq chg gur bssrevat bs
zrzbevny va ure unaqf, juvpu vf gur wrnybhfl bssrevat: naq gur cevrfg
funyy unir va uvf unaq gur ovggre jngre gung pnhfrgu gur phefr: 5:19
Naq gur cevrfg funyy punetr ure ol na bngu, naq fnl hagb gur jbzna, Vs
ab zna unir ynva jvgu gurr, naq vs gubh unfg abg tbar nfvqr gb
hapyrnaarff jvgu nabgure vafgrnq bs gul uhfonaq, or gubh serr sebz
guvf ovggre jngre gung pnhfrgu gur phefr: 5:20 Ohg vs gubh unfg tbar
nfvqr gb nabgure vafgrnq bs gul uhfonaq, naq vs gubh or qrsvyrq, naq
fbzr zna unir ynva jvgu gurr orfvqr guvar uhfonaq: 5:21 Gura gur
cevrfg funyy punetr gur jbzna jvgu na bngu bs phefvat, naq gur cevrfg
funyy fnl hagb gur jbzna, Gur YBEQ znxr gurr n phefr naq na bngu nzbat
gul crbcyr, jura gur YBEQ qbgu znxr gul guvtu gb ebg, naq gul oryyl gb
fjryy; 5:22 Naq guvf jngre gung pnhfrgu gur phefr funyy tb vagb gul
objryf, gb znxr gul oryyl gb fjryy, naq gul guvtu gb ebg: Naq gur
jbzna funyy fnl, Nzra, nzra.

5:23 Naq gur cevrfg funyy jevgr gurfr phefrf va n obbx, naq ur funyy
oybg gurz bhg jvgu gur ovggre jngre: 5:24 Naq ur funyy pnhfr gur jbzna
gb qevax gur ovggre jngre gung pnhfrgu gur phefr: naq gur jngre gung
pnhfrgu gur phefr funyy ragre vagb ure, naq orpbzr ovggre.

5:25 Gura gur cevrfg funyy gnxr gur wrnybhfl bssrevat bhg bs gur
jbzna'f unaq, naq funyy jnir gur bssrevat orsber gur YBEQ, naq bssre
vg hcba gur nygne: 5:26 Naq gur cevrfg funyy gnxr na unaqshy bs gur
bssrevat, rira gur zrzbevny gurerbs, naq ohea vg hcba gur nygne, naq
nsgrejneq funyy pnhfr gur jbzna gb qevax gur jngre.

5:27 Naq jura ur ungu znqr ure gb qevax gur jngre, gura vg funyy pbzr
gb cnff, gung, vs fur or qrsvyrq, naq unir qbar gerfcnff ntnvafg ure
uhfonaq, gung gur jngre gung pnhfrgu gur phefr funyy ragre vagb ure,
naq orpbzr ovggre, naq ure oryyl funyy fjryy, naq ure guvtu funyy ebg:
naq gur jbzna funyy or n phefr nzbat ure crbcyr.

5:28 Naq vs gur jbzna or abg qrsvyrq, ohg or pyrna; gura fur funyy or
serr, naq funyy pbaprvir frrq.

5:29 Guvf vf gur ynj bs wrnybhfvrf, jura n jvsr tbrgu nfvqr gb nabgure
vafgrnq bs ure uhfonaq, naq vf qrsvyrq; 5:30 Be jura gur fcvevg bs
wrnybhfl pbzrgu hcba uvz, naq ur or wrnybhf bire uvf jvsr, naq funyy
frg gur jbzna orsber gur YBEQ, naq gur cevrfg funyy rkrphgr hcba ure
nyy guvf ynj.

5:31 Gura funyy gur zna or thvygyrff sebz vavdhvgl, naq guvf jbzna
funyy orne ure vavdhvgl.

6:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 6:2 Fcrnx hagb gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry, naq fnl hagb gurz, Jura rvgure zna be jbzna funyy frcnengr
gurzfryirf gb ibj n ibj bs n Anmnevgr, gb frcnengr gurzfryirf hagb gur
YBEQ: 6:3 Ur funyy frcnengr uvzfrys sebz jvar naq fgebat qevax, naq
funyy qevax ab ivartne bs jvar, be ivartne bs fgebat qevax, arvgure
funyy ur qevax nal yvdhbe bs tencrf, abe rng zbvfg tencrf, be qevrq.

6:4 Nyy gur qnlf bs uvf frcnengvba funyy ur rng abguvat gung vf znqr
bs gur ivar gerr, sebz gur xrearyf rira gb gur uhfx.

6:5 Nyy gur qnlf bs gur ibj bs uvf frcnengvba gurer funyy ab enmbe
pbzr hcba uvf urnq: hagvy gur qnlf or shysvyyrq, va gur juvpu ur
frcnengrgu uvzfrys hagb gur YBEQ, ur funyy or ubyl, naq funyy yrg gur
ybpxf bs gur unve bs uvf urnq tebj.

6:6 Nyy gur qnlf gung ur frcnengrgu uvzfrys hagb gur YBEQ ur funyy
pbzr ng ab qrnq obql.

6:7 Ur funyy abg znxr uvzfrys hapyrna sbe uvf sngure, be sbe uvf
zbgure, sbe uvf oebgure, be sbe uvf fvfgre, jura gurl qvr: orpnhfr gur
pbafrpengvba bs uvf Tbq vf hcba uvf urnq.

6:8 Nyy gur qnlf bs uvf frcnengvba ur vf ubyl hagb gur YBEQ.

6:9 Naq vs nal zna qvr irel fhqqrayl ol uvz, naq ur ungu qrsvyrq gur
urnq bs uvf pbafrpengvba; gura ur funyy funir uvf urnq va gur qnl bs
uvf pyrnafvat, ba gur friragu qnl funyy ur funir vg.

6:10 Naq ba gur rvtugu qnl ur funyy oevat gjb ghegyrf, be gjb lbhat
cvtrbaf, gb gur cevrfg, gb gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba: 6:11 Naq gur cevrfg funyy bssre gur bar sbe n fva
bssrevat, naq gur bgure sbe n oheag bssrevat, naq znxr na ngbarzrag
sbe uvz, sbe gung ur fvaarq ol gur qrnq, naq funyy unyybj uvf urnq
gung fnzr qnl.

6:12 Naq ur funyy pbafrpengr hagb gur YBEQ gur qnlf bs uvf frcnengvba,
naq funyy oevat n ynzo bs gur svefg lrne sbe n gerfcnff bssrevat: ohg
gur qnlf gung jrer orsber funyy or ybfg, orpnhfr uvf frcnengvba jnf
qrsvyrq.

6:13 Naq guvf vf gur ynj bs gur Anmnevgr, jura gur qnlf bs uvf
frcnengvba ner shysvyyrq: ur funyy or oebhtug hagb gur qbbe bs gur
gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba: 6:14 Naq ur funyy bssre uvf bssrevat
hagb gur YBEQ, bar ur ynzo bs gur svefg lrne jvgubhg oyrzvfu sbe n
oheag bssrevat, naq bar rjr ynzo bs gur svefg lrne jvgubhg oyrzvfu sbe
n fva bssrevat, naq bar enz jvgubhg oyrzvfu sbe crnpr bssrevatf, 6:15
Naq n onfxrg bs hayrnirarq oernq, pnxrf bs svar sybhe zvatyrq jvgu
bvy, naq jnsref bs hayrnirarq oernq nabvagrq jvgu bvy, naq gurve zrng
bssrevat, naq gurve qevax bssrevatf.

6:16 Naq gur cevrfg funyy oevat gurz orsber gur YBEQ, naq funyy bssre
uvf fva bssrevat, naq uvf oheag bssrevat: 6:17 Naq ur funyy bssre gur
enz sbe n fnpevsvpr bs crnpr bssrevatf hagb gur YBEQ, jvgu gur onfxrg
bs hayrnirarq oernq: gur cevrfg funyy bssre nyfb uvf zrng bssrevat,
naq uvf qevax bssrevat.

6:18 Naq gur Anmnevgr funyy funir gur urnq bs uvf frcnengvba ng gur
qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, naq funyy gnxr gur unve bs
gur urnq bs uvf frcnengvba, naq chg vg va gur sver juvpu vf haqre gur
fnpevsvpr bs gur crnpr bssrevatf.

6:19 Naq gur cevrfg funyy gnxr gur fbqqra fubhyqre bs gur enz, naq bar
hayrnirarq pnxr bhg bs gur onfxrg, naq bar hayrnirarq jnsre, naq funyy
chg gurz hcba gur unaqf bs gur Anmnevgr, nsgre gur unve bs uvf
frcnengvba vf funira: 6:20 Naq gur cevrfg funyy jnir gurz sbe n jnir
bssrevat orsber gur YBEQ: guvf vf ubyl sbe gur cevrfg, jvgu gur jnir
oernfg naq urnir fubhyqre: naq nsgre gung gur Anmnevgr znl qevax jvar.

6:21 Guvf vf gur ynj bs gur Anmnevgr jub ungu ibjrq, naq bs uvf
bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ sbe uvf frcnengvba, orfvqr gung gung uvf unaq
funyy trg: nppbeqvat gb gur ibj juvpu ur ibjrq, fb ur zhfg qb nsgre
gur ynj bs uvf frcnengvba.

6:22 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 6:23 Fcrnx hagb Nneba naq
hagb uvf fbaf, fnlvat, Ba guvf jvfr lr funyy oyrff gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, fnlvat hagb gurz, 6:24 Gur YBEQ oyrff gurr, naq xrrc gurr:
6:25 Gur YBEQ znxr uvf snpr fuvar hcba gurr, naq or tenpvbhf hagb
gurr: 6:26 Gur YBEQ yvsg hc uvf pbhagranapr hcba gurr, naq tvir gurr
crnpr.

6:27 Naq gurl funyy chg zl anzr hcba gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq V
jvyy oyrff gurz.

7:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ba gur qnl gung Zbfrf unq shyyl frg hc gur
gnoreanpyr, naq unq nabvagrq vg, naq fnapgvsvrq vg, naq nyy gur
vafgehzragf gurerbs, obgu gur nygne naq nyy gur irffryf gurerbs, naq
unq nabvagrq gurz, naq fnapgvsvrq gurz; 7:2 Gung gur cevaprf bs
Vfenry, urnqf bs gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, jub jrer gur cevaprf bs
gur gevorf, naq jrer bire gurz gung jrer ahzorerq, bssrerq: 7:3 Naq
gurl oebhtug gurve bssrevat orsber gur YBEQ, fvk pbirerq jntbaf, naq
gjryir bkra; n jntba sbe gjb bs gur cevaprf, naq sbe rnpu bar na bk:
naq gurl oebhtug gurz orsber gur gnoreanpyr.

7:4 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 7:5 Gnxr vg bs gurz, gung
gurl znl or gb qb gur freivpr bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba;
naq gubh funyg tvir gurz hagb gur Yrivgrf, gb rirel zna nppbeqvat gb
uvf freivpr.

7:6 Naq Zbfrf gbbx gur jntbaf naq gur bkra, naq tnir gurz hagb gur
Yrivgrf.

7:7 Gjb jntbaf naq sbhe bkra ur tnir hagb gur fbaf bs Trefuba,
nppbeqvat gb gurve freivpr: 7:8 Naq sbhe jntbaf naq rvtug bkra ur tnir
hagb gur fbaf bs Zrenev, nppbeqvat hagb gurve freivpr, haqre gur unaq
bs Vgunzne gur fba bs Nneba gur cevrfg.

7:9 Ohg hagb gur fbaf bs Xbungu ur tnir abar: orpnhfr gur freivpr bs
gur fnapghnel orybatvat hagb gurz jnf gung gurl fubhyq orne hcba gurve
fubhyqref.

7:10 Naq gur cevaprf bssrerq sbe qrqvpngvat bs gur nygne va gur qnl
gung vg jnf nabvagrq, rira gur cevaprf bssrerq gurve bssrevat orsber
gur nygne.

7:11 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Gurl funyy bssre gurve bssrevat,
rnpu cevapr ba uvf qnl, sbe gur qrqvpngvat bs gur nygne.

7:12 Naq ur gung bssrerq uvf bssrevat gur svefg qnl jnf Anufuba gur
fba bs Nzzvanqno, bs gur gevor bs Whqnu: 7:13 Naq uvf bssrevat jnf bar
fvyire punetre, gur jrvtug gurerbs jnf na uhaqerq naq guvegl furxryf,
bar fvyire objy bs friragl furxryf, nsgre gur furxry bs gur fnapghnel;
obgu bs gurz jrer shyy bs svar sybhe zvatyrq jvgu bvy sbe n zrng
bssrevat: 7:14 Bar fcbba bs gra furxryf bs tbyq, shyy bs vaprafr: 7:15
Bar lbhat ohyybpx, bar enz, bar ynzo bs gur svefg lrne, sbe n oheag
bssrevat: 7:16 Bar xvq bs gur tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat: 7:17 Naq sbe n
fnpevsvpr bs crnpr bssrevatf, gjb bkra, svir enzf, svir ur tbngf, svir
ynzof bs gur svefg lrne: guvf jnf gur bssrevat bs Anufuba gur fba bs
Nzzvanqno.

7:18 Ba gur frpbaq qnl Argunarry gur fba bs Mhne, cevapr bs Vffnpune,
qvq bssre: 7:19 Ur bssrerq sbe uvf bssrevat bar fvyire punetre, gur
jrvtug jurerbs jnf na uhaqerq naq guvegl furxryf, bar fvyire objy bs
friragl furxryf, nsgre gur furxry bs gur fnapghnel; obgu bs gurz shyy
bs svar sybhe zvatyrq jvgu bvy sbe n zrng bssrevat: 7:20 Bar fcbba bs
tbyq bs gra furxryf, shyy bs vaprafr: 7:21 Bar lbhat ohyybpx, bar enz,
bar ynzo bs gur svefg lrne, sbe n oheag bssrevat: 7:22 Bar xvq bs gur
tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat: 7:23 Naq sbe n fnpevsvpr bs crnpr bssrevatf,
gjb bkra, svir enzf, svir ur tbngf, svir ynzof bs gur svefg lrne: guvf
jnf gur bssrevat bs Argunarry gur fba bs Mhne.

7:24 Ba gur guveq qnl Ryvno gur fba bs Uryba, cevapr bs gur puvyqera
bs Mrohyha, qvq bssre: 7:25 Uvf bssrevat jnf bar fvyire punetre, gur
jrvtug jurerbs jnf na uhaqerq naq guvegl furxryf, bar fvyire objy bs
friragl furxryf, nsgre gur furxry bs gur fnapghnel; obgu bs gurz shyy
bs svar sybhe zvatyrq jvgu bvy sbe n zrng bssrevat: 7:26 Bar tbyqra
fcbba bs gra furxryf, shyy bs vaprafr: 7:27 Bar lbhat ohyybpx, bar
enz, bar ynzo bs gur svefg lrne, sbe n oheag bssrevat: 7:28 Bar xvq bs
gur tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat: 7:29 Naq sbe n fnpevsvpr bs crnpr
bssrevatf, gjb bkra, svir enzf, svir ur tbngf, svir ynzof bs gur svefg
lrne: guvf jnf gur bssrevat bs Ryvno gur fba bs Uryba.

7:30 Ba gur sbhegu qnl Ryvmhe gur fba bs Furqrhe, cevapr bs gur
puvyqera bs Erhora, qvq bssre: 7:31 Uvf bssrevat jnf bar fvyire
punetre bs gur jrvtug bs na uhaqerq naq guvegl furxryf, bar fvyire
objy bs friragl furxryf, nsgre gur furxry bs gur fnapghnel; obgu bs
gurz shyy bs svar sybhe zvatyrq jvgu bvy sbe n zrng bssrevat: 7:32 Bar
tbyqra fcbba bs gra furxryf, shyy bs vaprafr: 7:33 Bar lbhat ohyybpx,
bar enz, bar ynzo bs gur svefg lrne, sbe n oheag bssrevat: 7:34 Bar
xvq bs gur tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat: 7:35 Naq sbe n fnpevsvpr bs crnpr
bssrevatf, gjb bkra, svir enzf, svir ur tbngf, svir ynzof bs gur svefg
lrne: guvf jnf gur bssrevat bs Ryvmhe gur fba bs Furqrhe.

7:36 Ba gur svsgu qnl Furyhzvry gur fba bs Mhevfunqqnv, cevapr bs gur
puvyqera bs Fvzrba, qvq bssre: 7:37 Uvf bssrevat jnf bar fvyire
punetre, gur jrvtug jurerbs jnf na uhaqerq naq guvegl furxryf, bar
fvyire objy bs friragl furxryf, nsgre gur furxry bs gur fnapghnel;
obgu bs gurz shyy bs svar sybhe zvatyrq jvgu bvy sbe n zrng bssrevat:
7:38 Bar tbyqra fcbba bs gra furxryf, shyy bs vaprafr: 7:39 Bar lbhat
ohyybpx, bar enz, bar ynzo bs gur svefg lrne, sbe n oheag bssrevat:
7:40 Bar xvq bs gur tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat: 7:41 Naq sbe n fnpevsvpr
bs crnpr bssrevatf, gjb bkra, svir enzf, svir ur tbngf, svir ynzof bs
gur svefg lrne: guvf jnf gur bssrevat bs Furyhzvry gur fba bs
Mhevfunqqnv.

7:42 Ba gur fvkgu qnl Ryvnfncu gur fba bs Qrhry, cevapr bs gur
puvyqera bs Tnq, bssrerq: 7:43 Uvf bssrevat jnf bar fvyire punetre bs
gur jrvtug bs na uhaqerq naq guvegl furxryf, n fvyire objy bs friragl
furxryf, nsgre gur furxry bs gur fnapghnel; obgu bs gurz shyy bs svar
sybhe zvatyrq jvgu bvy sbe n zrng bssrevat: 7:44 Bar tbyqra fcbba bs
gra furxryf, shyy bs vaprafr: 7:45 Bar lbhat ohyybpx, bar enz, bar
ynzo bs gur svefg lrne, sbe n oheag bssrevat: 7:46 Bar xvq bs gur
tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat: 7:47 Naq sbe n fnpevsvpr bs crnpr bssrevatf,
gjb bkra, svir enzf, svir ur tbngf, svir ynzof bs gur svefg lrne: guvf
jnf gur bssrevat bs Ryvnfncu gur fba bs Qrhry.

7:48 Ba gur friragu qnl Ryvfunzn gur fba bs Nzzvuhq, cevapr bs gur
puvyqera bs Rcuenvz, bssrerq: 7:49 Uvf bssrevat jnf bar fvyire
punetre, gur jrvtug jurerbs jnf na uhaqerq naq guvegl furxryf, bar
fvyire objy bs friragl furxryf, nsgre gur furxry bs gur fnapghnel;
obgu bs gurz shyy bs svar sybhe zvatyrq jvgu bvy sbe n zrng bssrevat:
7:50 Bar tbyqra fcbba bs gra furxryf, shyy bs vaprafr: 7:51 Bar lbhat
ohyybpx, bar enz, bar ynzo bs gur svefg lrne, sbe n oheag bssrevat:
7:52 Bar xvq bs gur tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat: 7:53 Naq sbe n fnpevsvpr
bs crnpr bssrevatf, gjb bkra, svir enzf, svir ur tbngf, svir ynzof bs
gur svefg lrne: guvf jnf gur bssrevat bs Ryvfunzn gur fba bs Nzzvuhq.

7:54 Ba gur rvtugu qnl bssrerq Tnznyvry gur fba bs Crqnumhe, cevapr bs
gur puvyqera bs Znanffru: 7:55 Uvf bssrevat jnf bar fvyire punetre bs
gur jrvtug bs na uhaqerq naq guvegl furxryf, bar fvyire objy bs
friragl furxryf, nsgre gur furxry bs gur fnapghnel; obgu bs gurz shyy
bs svar sybhe zvatyrq jvgu bvy sbe n zrng bssrevat: 7:56 Bar tbyqra
fcbba bs gra furxryf, shyy bs vaprafr: 7:57 Bar lbhat ohyybpx, bar
enz, bar ynzo bs gur svefg lrne, sbe n oheag bssrevat: 7:58 Bar xvq bs
gur tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat: 7:59 Naq sbe n fnpevsvpr bs crnpr
bssrevatf, gjb bkra, svir enzf, svir ur tbngf, svir ynzof bs gur svefg
lrne: guvf jnf gur bssrevat bs Tnznyvry gur fba bs Crqnumhe.

7:60 Ba gur avagu qnl Novqna gur fba bs Tvqrbav, cevapr bs gur
puvyqera bs Orawnzva, bssrerq: 7:61 Uvf bssrevat jnf bar fvyire
punetre, gur jrvtug jurerbs jnf na uhaqerq naq guvegl furxryf, bar
fvyire objy bs friragl furxryf, nsgre gur furxry bs gur fnapghnel;
obgu bs gurz shyy bs svar sybhe zvatyrq jvgu bvy sbe n zrng bssrevat:
7:62 Bar tbyqra fcbba bs gra furxryf, shyy bs vaprafr: 7:63 Bar lbhat
ohyybpx, bar enz, bar ynzo bs gur svefg lrne, sbe n oheag bssrevat:
7:64 Bar xvq bs gur tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat: 7:65 Naq sbe n fnpevsvpr
bs crnpr bssrevatf, gjb bkra, svir enzf, svir ur tbngf, svir ynzof bs
gur svefg lrne: guvf jnf gur bssrevat bs Novqna gur fba bs Tvqrbav.

7:66 Ba gur gragu qnl Nuvrmre gur fba bs Nzzvfunqqnv, cevapr bs gur
puvyqera bs Qna, bssrerq: 7:67 Uvf bssrevat jnf bar fvyire punetre,
gur jrvtug jurerbs jnf na uhaqerq naq guvegl furxryf, bar fvyire objy
bs friragl furxryf, nsgre gur furxry bs gur fnapghnel; obgu bs gurz
shyy bs svar sybhe zvatyrq jvgu bvy sbe n zrng bssrevat: 7:68 Bar
tbyqra fcbba bs gra furxryf, shyy bs vaprafr: 7:69 Bar lbhat ohyybpx,
bar enz, bar ynzo bs gur svefg lrne, sbe n oheag bssrevat: 7:70 Bar
xvq bs gur tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat: 7:71 Naq sbe n fnpevsvpr bs crnpr
bssrevatf, gjb bkra, svir enzf, svir ur tbngf, svir ynzof bs gur svefg
lrne: guvf jnf gur bssrevat bs Nuvrmre gur fba bs Nzzvfunqqnv.

7:72 Ba gur ryriragu qnl Cntvry gur fba bs Bpena, cevapr bs gur
puvyqera bs Nfure, bssrerq: 7:73 Uvf bssrevat jnf bar fvyire punetre,
gur jrvtug jurerbs jnf na uhaqerq naq guvegl furxryf, bar fvyire objy
bs friragl furxryf, nsgre gur furxry bs gur fnapghnel; obgu bs gurz
shyy bs svar sybhe zvatyrq jvgu bvy sbe n zrng bssrevat: 7:74 Bar
tbyqra fcbba bs gra furxryf, shyy bs vaprafr: 7:75 Bar lbhat ohyybpx,
bar enz, bar ynzo bs gur svefg lrne, sbe n oheag bssrevat: 7:76 Bar
xvq bs gur tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat: 7:77 Naq sbe n fnpevsvpr bs crnpr
bssrevatf, gjb bkra, svir enzf, svir ur tbngf, svir ynzof bs gur svefg
lrne: guvf jnf gur bssrevat bs Cntvry gur fba bs Bpena.

7:78 Ba gur gjrysgu qnl Nuven gur fba bs Rana, cevapr bs gur puvyqera
bs Ancugnyv, bssrerq: 7:79 Uvf bssrevat jnf bar fvyire punetre, gur
jrvtug jurerbs jnf na uhaqerq naq guvegl furxryf, bar fvyire objy bs
friragl furxryf, nsgre gur furxry bs gur fnapghnel; obgu bs gurz shyy
bs svar sybhe zvatyrq jvgu bvy sbe n zrng bssrevat: 7:80 Bar tbyqra
fcbba bs gra furxryf, shyy bs vaprafr: 7:81 Bar lbhat ohyybpx, bar
enz, bar ynzo bs gur svefg lrne, sbe n oheag bssrevat: 7:82 Bar xvq bs
gur tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat: 7:83 Naq sbe n fnpevsvpr bs crnpr
bssrevatf, gjb bkra, svir enzf, svir ur tbngf, svir ynzof bs gur svefg
lrne: guvf jnf gur bssrevat bs Nuven gur fba bs Rana.

7:84 Guvf jnf gur qrqvpngvba bs gur nygne, va gur qnl jura vg jnf
nabvagrq, ol gur cevaprf bs Vfenry: gjryir punetref bs fvyire, gjryir
fvyire objyf, gjryir fcbbaf bs tbyq: 7:85 Rnpu punetre bs fvyire
jrvtuvat na uhaqerq naq guvegl furxryf, rnpu objy friragl: nyy gur
fvyire irffryf jrvturq gjb gubhfnaq naq sbhe uhaqerq furxryf, nsgre
gur furxry bs gur fnapghnel: 7:86 Gur tbyqra fcbbaf jrer gjryir, shyy
bs vaprafr, jrvtuvat gra furxryf ncvrpr, nsgre gur furxry bs gur
fnapghnel: nyy gur tbyq bs gur fcbbaf jnf na uhaqerq naq gjragl
furxryf.

7:87 Nyy gur bkra sbe gur oheag bssrevat jrer gjryir ohyybpxf, gur
enzf gjryir, gur ynzof bs gur svefg lrne gjryir, jvgu gurve zrng
bssrevat: naq gur xvqf bs gur tbngf sbe fva bssrevat gjryir.

7:88 Naq nyy gur bkra sbe gur fnpevsvpr bs gur crnpr bssrevatf jrer
gjragl naq sbhe ohyybpxf, gur enzf fvkgl, gur ur tbngf fvkgl, gur
ynzof bs gur svefg lrne fvkgl. Guvf jnf gur qrqvpngvba bs gur nygne,
nsgre gung vg jnf nabvagrq.

7:89 Naq jura Zbfrf jnf tbar vagb gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba
gb fcrnx jvgu uvz, gura ur urneq gur ibvpr bs bar fcrnxvat hagb uvz
sebz bss gur zrepl frng gung jnf hcba gur nex bs grfgvzbal, sebz
orgjrra gur gjb purehovzf: naq ur fcnxr hagb uvz.

8:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 8:2 Fcrnx hagb Nneba naq
fnl hagb uvz, Jura gubh yvtugrfg gur ynzcf, gur frira ynzcf funyy tvir
yvtug bire ntnvafg gur pnaqyrfgvpx.

8:3 Naq Nneba qvq fb; ur yvtugrq gur ynzcf gurerbs bire ntnvafg gur
pnaqyrfgvpx, nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

8:4 Naq guvf jbex bs gur pnaqyrfgvpx jnf bs orngra tbyq, hagb gur
funsg gurerbs, hagb gur sybjref gurerbs, jnf orngra jbex: nppbeqvat
hagb gur cnggrea juvpu gur YBEQ unq furjrq Zbfrf, fb ur znqr gur
pnaqyrfgvpx.

8:5 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 8:6 Gnxr gur Yrivgrf sebz
nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq pyrnafr gurz.

8:7 Naq guhf funyg gubh qb hagb gurz, gb pyrnafr gurz: Fcevaxyr jngre
bs chevslvat hcba gurz, naq yrg gurz funir nyy gurve syrfu, naq yrg
gurz jnfu gurve pybgurf, naq fb znxr gurzfryirf pyrna.

8:8 Gura yrg gurz gnxr n lbhat ohyybpx jvgu uvf zrng bssrevat, rira
svar sybhe zvatyrq jvgu bvy, naq nabgure lbhat ohyybpx funyg gubh gnxr
sbe n fva bssrevat.

8:9 Naq gubh funyg oevat gur Yrivgrf orsber gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba: naq gubh funyg tngure gur jubyr nffrzoyl bs gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry gbtrgure: 8:10 Naq gubh funyg oevat gur Yrivgrf orsber gur
YBEQ: naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry funyy chg gurve unaqf hcba gur
Yrivgrf: 8:11 Naq Nneba funyy bssre gur Yrivgrf orsber gur YBEQ sbe na
bssrevat bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, gung gurl znl rkrphgr gur freivpr
bs gur YBEQ.

8:12 Naq gur Yrivgrf funyy ynl gurve unaqf hcba gur urnqf bs gur
ohyybpxf: naq gubh funyg bssre gur bar sbe n fva bssrevat, naq gur
bgure sbe n oheag bssrevat, hagb gur YBEQ, gb znxr na ngbarzrag sbe
gur Yrivgrf.

8:13 Naq gubh funyg frg gur Yrivgrf orsber Nneba, naq orsber uvf fbaf,
naq bssre gurz sbe na bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ.

8:14 Guhf funyg gubh frcnengr gur Yrivgrf sebz nzbat gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry: naq gur Yrivgrf funyy or zvar.

8:15 Naq nsgre gung funyy gur Yrivgrf tb va gb qb gur freivpr bs gur
gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba: naq gubh funyg pyrnafr gurz, naq bssre
gurz sbe na bssrevat.

8:16 Sbe gurl ner jubyyl tvira hagb zr sebz nzbat gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry; vafgrnq bs fhpu nf bcra rirel jbzo, rira vafgrnq bs gur
svefgobea bs nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, unir V gnxra gurz hagb zr.

8:17 Sbe nyy gur svefgobea bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry ner zvar, obgu
zna naq ornfg: ba gur qnl gung V fzbgr rirel svefgobea va gur ynaq bs
Rtlcg V fnapgvsvrq gurz sbe zlfrys.

8:18 Naq V unir gnxra gur Yrivgrf sbe nyy gur svefgobea bs gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry.

8:19 Naq V unir tvira gur Yrivgrf nf n tvsg gb Nneba naq gb uvf fbaf
sebz nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, gb qb gur freivpr bs gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, naq gb znxr na
ngbarzrag sbe gur puvyqera bs Vfenry: gung gurer or ab cynthr nzbat
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, jura gur puvyqera bs Vfenry pbzr avtu hagb gur
fnapghnel.

8:20 Naq Zbfrf, naq Nneba, naq nyy gur pbatertngvba bs gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, qvq gb gur Yrivgrf nppbeqvat hagb nyy gung gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq
Zbfrf pbapreavat gur Yrivgrf, fb qvq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry hagb gurz.

8:21 Naq gur Yrivgrf jrer chevsvrq, naq gurl jnfurq gurve pybgurf; naq
Nneba bssrerq gurz nf na bssrevat orsber gur YBEQ; naq Nneba znqr na
ngbarzrag sbe gurz gb pyrnafr gurz.

8:22 Naq nsgre gung jrag gur Yrivgrf va gb qb gurve freivpr va gur
gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba orsber Nneba, naq orsber uvf fbaf: nf
gur YBEQ unq pbzznaqrq Zbfrf pbapreavat gur Yrivgrf, fb qvq gurl hagb
gurz.

8:23 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 8:24 Guvf vf vg gung
orybatrgu hagb gur Yrivgrf: sebz gjragl naq svir lrnef byq naq hcjneq
gurl funyy tb va gb jnvg hcba gur freivpr bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba: 8:25 Naq sebz gur ntr bs svsgl lrnef gurl funyy prnfr
jnvgvat hcba gur freivpr gurerbs, naq funyy freir ab zber: 8:26 Ohg
funyy zvavfgre jvgu gurve oerguera va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba, gb xrrc gur punetr, naq funyy qb ab freivpr. Guhf funyg
gubh qb hagb gur Yrivgrf gbhpuvat gurve punetr.

9:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf va gur jvyqrearff bs Fvanv, va gur
svefg zbagu bs gur frpbaq lrne nsgre gurl jrer pbzr bhg bs gur ynaq bs
Rtlcg, fnlvat, 9:2 Yrg gur puvyqera bs Vfenry nyfb xrrc gur cnffbire
ng uvf nccbvagrq frnfba.

9:3 Va gur sbhegrragu qnl bs guvf zbagu, ng rira, lr funyy xrrc vg va
uvf nccbvagrq frnfba: nppbeqvat gb nyy gur evgrf bs vg, naq nppbeqvat
gb nyy gur prerzbavrf gurerbs, funyy lr xrrc vg.

9:4 Naq Zbfrf fcnxr hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, gung gurl fubhyq xrrc
gur cnffbire.

9:5 Naq gurl xrcg gur cnffbire ba gur sbhegrragu qnl bs gur svefg
zbagu ng rira va gur jvyqrearff bs Fvanv: nppbeqvat gb nyy gung gur
YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf, fb qvq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

9:6 Naq gurer jrer pregnva zra, jub jrer qrsvyrq ol gur qrnq obql bs n
zna, gung gurl pbhyq abg xrrc gur cnffbire ba gung qnl: naq gurl pnzr
orsber Zbfrf naq orsber Nneba ba gung qnl: 9:7 Naq gubfr zra fnvq hagb
uvz, Jr ner qrsvyrq ol gur qrnq obql bs n zna: jurersber ner jr xrcg
onpx, gung jr znl abg bssre na bssrevat bs gur YBEQ va uvf nccbvagrq
frnfba nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry?  9:8 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb gurz,
Fgnaq fgvyy, naq V jvyy urne jung gur YBEQ jvyy pbzznaq pbapreavat
lbh.

9:9 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 9:10 Fcrnx hagb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Vs nal zna bs lbh be bs lbhe cbfgrevgl
funyy or hapyrna ol ernfba bs n qrnq obql, be or va n wbhearl nsne
bss, lrg ur funyy xrrc gur cnffbire hagb gur YBEQ.

9:11 Gur sbhegrragu qnl bs gur frpbaq zbagu ng rira gurl funyy xrrc
vg, naq rng vg jvgu hayrnirarq oernq naq ovggre ureof.

9:12 Gurl funyy yrnir abar bs vg hagb gur zbeavat, abe oernx nal obar
bs vg: nppbeqvat gb nyy gur beqvanaprf bs gur cnffbire gurl funyy xrrc
vg.

9:13 Ohg gur zna gung vf pyrna, naq vf abg va n wbhearl, naq
sbeornergu gb xrrc gur cnffbire, rira gur fnzr fbhy funyy or phg bss
sebz nzbat uvf crbcyr: orpnhfr ur oebhtug abg gur bssrevat bs gur YBEQ
va uvf nccbvagrq frnfba, gung zna funyy orne uvf fva.

9:14 Naq vs n fgenatre funyy fbwbhea nzbat lbh, naq jvyy xrrc gur
cnffbire hagb gur YBEQ; nppbeqvat gb gur beqvanapr bs gur cnffbire,
naq nppbeqvat gb gur znaare gurerbs, fb funyy ur qb: lr funyy unir bar
beqvanapr, obgu sbe gur fgenatre, naq sbe uvz gung jnf obea va gur
ynaq.

9:15 Naq ba gur qnl gung gur gnoreanpyr jnf ernerq hc gur pybhq
pbirerq gur gnoreanpyr, anzryl, gur grag bs gur grfgvzbal: naq ng rira
gurer jnf hcba gur gnoreanpyr nf vg jrer gur nccrnenapr bs sver, hagvy
gur zbeavat.

9:16 Fb vg jnf nyjnl: gur pybhq pbirerq vg ol qnl, naq gur nccrnenapr
bs sver ol avtug.

9:17 Naq jura gur pybhq jnf gnxra hc sebz gur gnoreanpyr, gura nsgre
gung gur puvyqera bs Vfenry wbhearlrq: naq va gur cynpr jurer gur
pybhq nobqr, gurer gur puvyqera bs Vfenry cvgpurq gurve gragf.

9:18 Ng gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ gur puvyqera bs Vfenry wbhearlrq,
naq ng gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ gurl cvgpurq: nf ybat nf gur pybhq
nobqr hcba gur gnoreanpyr gurl erfgrq va gurve gragf.

9:19 Naq jura gur pybhq gneevrq ybat hcba gur gnoreanpyr znal qnlf,
gura gur puvyqera bs Vfenry xrcg gur punetr bs gur YBEQ, naq wbhearlrq
abg.

9:20 Naq fb vg jnf, jura gur pybhq jnf n srj qnlf hcba gur gnoreanpyr;
nppbeqvat gb gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ gurl nobqr va gurve gragf,
naq nppbeqvat gb gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ gurl wbhearlrq.

9:21 Naq fb vg jnf, jura gur pybhq nobqr sebz rira hagb gur zbeavat,
naq gung gur pybhq jnf gnxra hc va gur zbeavat, gura gurl wbhearlrq:
jurgure vg jnf ol qnl be ol avtug gung gur pybhq jnf gnxra hc, gurl
wbhearlrq.

9:22 Be jurgure vg jrer gjb qnlf, be n zbagu, be n lrne, gung gur
pybhq gneevrq hcba gur gnoreanpyr, erznvavat gurerba, gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry nobqr va gurve gragf, naq wbhearlrq abg: ohg jura vg jnf gnxra
hc, gurl wbhearlrq.

9:23 Ng gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ gurl erfgrq va gur gragf, naq ng
gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ gurl wbhearlrq: gurl xrcg gur punetr bs
gur YBEQ, ng gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ ol gur unaq bs Zbfrf.

10:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 10:2 Znxr gurr gjb
gehzcrgf bs fvyire; bs n jubyr cvrpr funyg gubh znxr gurz: gung gubh
znlrfg hfr gurz sbe gur pnyyvat bs gur nffrzoyl, naq sbe gur
wbhearlvat bs gur pnzcf.

10:3 Naq jura gurl funyy oybj jvgu gurz, nyy gur nffrzoyl funyy
nffrzoyr gurzfryirf gb gurr ng gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba.

10:4 Naq vs gurl oybj ohg jvgu bar gehzcrg, gura gur cevaprf, juvpu
ner urnqf bs gur gubhfnaqf bs Vfenry, funyy tngure gurzfryirf hagb
gurr.

10:5 Jura lr oybj na nynez, gura gur pnzcf gung yvr ba gur rnfg cnegf
funyy tb sbejneq.

10:6 Jura lr oybj na nynez gur frpbaq gvzr, gura gur pnzcf gung yvr ba
gur fbhgu fvqr funyy gnxr gurve wbhearl: gurl funyy oybj na nynez sbe
gurve wbhearlf.

10:7 Ohg jura gur pbatertngvba vf gb or tngurerq gbtrgure, lr funyy
oybj, ohg lr funyy abg fbhaq na nynez.

10:8 Naq gur fbaf bs Nneba, gur cevrfgf, funyy oybj jvgu gur gehzcrgf;
naq gurl funyy or gb lbh sbe na beqvanapr sbe rire guebhtubhg lbhe
trarengvbaf.

10:9 Naq vs lr tb gb jne va lbhe ynaq ntnvafg gur rarzl gung
bccerffrgu lbh, gura lr funyy oybj na nynez jvgu gur gehzcrgf; naq lr
funyy or erzrzorerq orsber gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, naq lr funyy or fnirq
sebz lbhe rarzvrf.

10:10 Nyfb va gur qnl bs lbhe tynqarff, naq va lbhe fbyrza qnlf, naq
va gur ortvaavatf bs lbhe zbaguf, lr funyy oybj jvgu gur gehzcrgf bire
lbhe oheag bssrevatf, naq bire gur fnpevsvprf bs lbhe crnpr bssrevatf;
gung gurl znl or gb lbh sbe n zrzbevny orsber lbhe Tbq: V nz gur YBEQ
lbhe Tbq.

10:11 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ba gur gjragvrgu qnl bs gur frpbaq zbagu, va
gur frpbaq lrne, gung gur pybhq jnf gnxra hc sebz bss gur gnoreanpyr
bs gur grfgvzbal.

10:12 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry gbbx gurve wbhearlf bhg bs gur
jvyqrearff bs Fvanv; naq gur pybhq erfgrq va gur jvyqrearff bs Cnena.

10:13 Naq gurl svefg gbbx gurve wbhearl nppbeqvat gb gur pbzznaqzrag
bs gur YBEQ ol gur unaq bs Zbfrf.

10:14 Va gur svefg cynpr jrag gur fgnaqneq bs gur pnzc bs gur puvyqera
bs Whqnu nppbeqvat gb gurve nezvrf: naq bire uvf ubfg jnf Anufuba gur
fba bs Nzzvanqno.

10:15 Naq bire gur ubfg bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Vffnpune jnf
Argunarry gur fba bs Mhne.

10:16 Naq bire gur ubfg bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Mrohyha jnf
Ryvno gur fba bs Uryba.

10:17 Naq gur gnoreanpyr jnf gnxra qbja; naq gur fbaf bs Trefuba naq
gur fbaf bs Zrenev frg sbejneq, ornevat gur gnoreanpyr.

10:18 Naq gur fgnaqneq bs gur pnzc bs Erhora frg sbejneq nppbeqvat gb
gurve nezvrf: naq bire uvf ubfg jnf Ryvmhe gur fba bs Furqrhe.

10:19 Naq bire gur ubfg bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Fvzrba jnf
Furyhzvry gur fba bs Mhevfunqqnv.

10:20 Naq bire gur ubfg bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Tnq jnf
Ryvnfncu gur fba bs Qrhry.

10:21 Naq gur Xbunguvgrf frg sbejneq, ornevat gur fnapghnel: naq gur
bgure qvq frg hc gur gnoreanpyr ntnvafg gurl pnzr.

10:22 Naq gur fgnaqneq bs gur pnzc bs gur puvyqera bs Rcuenvz frg
sbejneq nppbeqvat gb gurve nezvrf: naq bire uvf ubfg jnf Ryvfunzn gur
fba bs Nzzvuhq.

10:23 Naq bire gur ubfg bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Znanffru jnf
Tnznyvry gur fba bs Crqnumhe.

10:24 Naq bire gur ubfg bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva jnf
Novqna gur fba bs Tvqrbav.

10:25 Naq gur fgnaqneq bs gur pnzc bs gur puvyqera bs Qna frg sbejneq,
juvpu jnf gur ererjneq bs nyy gur pnzcf guebhtubhg gurve ubfgf: naq
bire uvf ubfg jnf Nuvrmre gur fba bs Nzzvfunqqnv.

10:26 Naq bire gur ubfg bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Nfure jnf
Cntvry gur fba bs Bpena.

10:27 Naq bire gur ubfg bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Ancugnyv jnf
Nuven gur fba bs Rana.

10:28 Guhf jrer gur wbhearlvatf bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry nppbeqvat gb
gurve nezvrf, jura gurl frg sbejneq.

10:29 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb Ubono, gur fba bs Enthry gur Zvqvnavgr,
Zbfrf' sngure va ynj, Jr ner wbhearlvat hagb gur cynpr bs juvpu gur
YBEQ fnvq, V jvyy tvir vg lbh: pbzr gubh jvgu hf, naq jr jvyy qb gurr
tbbq: sbe gur YBEQ ungu fcbxra tbbq pbapreavat Vfenry.

10:30 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, V jvyy abg tb; ohg V jvyy qrcneg gb zvar
bja ynaq, naq gb zl xvaqerq.

10:31 Naq ur fnvq, Yrnir hf abg, V cenl gurr; sbenfzhpu nf gubh
xabjrfg ubj jr ner gb rapnzc va gur jvyqrearff, naq gubh znlrfg or gb
hf vafgrnq bs rlrf.

10:32 Naq vg funyy or, vs gubh tb jvgu hf, lrn, vg funyy or, gung jung
tbbqarff gur YBEQ funyy qb hagb hf, gur fnzr jvyy jr qb hagb gurr.

10:33 Naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz gur zbhag bs gur YBEQ guerr qnlf'
wbhearl: naq gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ jrag orsber gurz va
gur guerr qnlf' wbhearl, gb frnepu bhg n erfgvat cynpr sbe gurz.

10:34 Naq gur pybhq bs gur YBEQ jnf hcba gurz ol qnl, jura gurl jrag
bhg bs gur pnzc.

10:35 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur nex frg sbejneq, gung Zbfrf fnvq,
Evfr hc, YBEQ, naq yrg guvar rarzvrf or fpnggrerq; naq yrg gurz gung
ungr gurr syrr orsber gurr.

10:36 Naq jura vg erfgrq, ur fnvq, Erghea, B YBEQ, hagb gur znal
gubhfnaqf bs Vfenry.

11:1 Naq jura gur crbcyr pbzcynvarq, vg qvfcyrnfrq gur YBEQ: naq gur
YBEQ urneq vg; naq uvf natre jnf xvaqyrq; naq gur sver bs gur YBEQ
oheag nzbat gurz, naq pbafhzrq gurz gung jrer va gur hggrezbfg cnegf
bs gur pnzc.

11:2 Naq gur crbcyr pevrq hagb Zbfrf; naq jura Zbfrf cenlrq hagb gur
YBEQ, gur sver jnf dhrapurq.

11:3 Naq ur pnyyrq gur anzr bs gur cynpr Gnorenu: orpnhfr gur sver bs
gur YBEQ oheag nzbat gurz.

11:4 Naq gur zvkg zhygvghqr gung jnf nzbat gurz sryy n yhfgvat: naq
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry nyfb jrcg ntnva, naq fnvq, Jub funyy tvir hf
syrfu gb rng?  11:5 Jr erzrzore gur svfu, juvpu jr qvq rng va Rtlcg
serryl; gur phphzoref, naq gur zrybaf, naq gur yrrxf, naq gur bavbaf,
naq gur tneyvpx: 11:6 Ohg abj bhe fbhy vf qevrq njnl: gurer vf abguvat
ng nyy, orfvqr guvf znaan, orsber bhe rlrf.

11:7 Naq gur znaan jnf nf pbevnaqre frrq, naq gur pbybhe gurerbs nf
gur pbybhe bs oqryyvhz.

11:8 Naq gur crbcyr jrag nobhg, naq tngurerq vg, naq tebhaq vg va
zvyyf, be orng vg va n zbegne, naq onxrq vg va cnaf, naq znqr pnxrf bs
vg: naq gur gnfgr bs vg jnf nf gur gnfgr bs serfu bvy.

11:9 Naq jura gur qrj sryy hcba gur pnzc va gur avtug, gur znaan sryy
hcba vg.

11:10 Gura Zbfrf urneq gur crbcyr jrrc guebhtubhg gurve snzvyvrf,
rirel zna va gur qbbe bs uvf grag: naq gur natre bs gur YBEQ jnf
xvaqyrq terngyl; Zbfrf nyfb jnf qvfcyrnfrq.

11:11 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb gur YBEQ, Jurersber unfg gubh nssyvpgrq gul
freinag? naq jurersber unir V abg sbhaq snibhe va gul fvtug, gung gubh
ynlrfg gur oheqra bs nyy guvf crbcyr hcba zr?  11:12 Unir V pbaprvirq
nyy guvf crbcyr? unir V ortbggra gurz, gung gubh fubhyqrfg fnl hagb
zr, Pneel gurz va gul obfbz, nf n ahefvat sngure ornergu gur fhpxvat
puvyq, hagb gur ynaq juvpu gubh fjnerfg hagb gurve snguref?  11:13
Jurapr fubhyq V unir syrfu gb tvir hagb nyy guvf crbcyr? sbe gurl jrrc
hagb zr, fnlvat, Tvir hf syrfu, gung jr znl rng.

11:14 V nz abg noyr gb orne nyy guvf crbcyr nybar, orpnhfr vg vf gbb
urnil sbe zr.

11:15 Naq vs gubh qrny guhf jvgu zr, xvyy zr, V cenl gurr, bhg bs
unaq, vs V unir sbhaq snibhe va gul fvtug; naq yrg zr abg frr zl
jergpurqarff.

11:16 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Tngure hagb zr friragl zra bs gur
ryqref bs Vfenry, jubz gubh xabjrfg gb or gur ryqref bs gur crbcyr,
naq bssvpref bire gurz; naq oevat gurz hagb gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba, gung gurl znl fgnaq gurer jvgu gurr.

11:17 Naq V jvyy pbzr qbja naq gnyx jvgu gurr gurer: naq V jvyy gnxr
bs gur fcvevg juvpu vf hcba gurr, naq jvyy chg vg hcba gurz; naq gurl
funyy orne gur oheqra bs gur crbcyr jvgu gurr, gung gubh orne vg abg
gulfrys nybar.

11:18 Naq fnl gubh hagb gur crbcyr, Fnapgvsl lbhefryirf ntnvafg gb
zbeebj, naq lr funyy rng syrfu: sbe lr unir jrcg va gur rnef bs gur
YBEQ, fnlvat, Jub funyy tvir hf syrfu gb rng? sbe vg jnf jryy jvgu hf
va Rtlcg: gurersber gur YBEQ jvyy tvir lbh syrfu, naq lr funyy rng.

11:19 Lr funyy abg rng bar qnl, abe gjb qnlf, abe svir qnlf, arvgure
gra qnlf, abe gjragl qnlf; 11:20 Ohg rira n jubyr zbagu, hagvy vg pbzr
bhg ng lbhe abfgevyf, naq vg or ybngufbzr hagb lbh: orpnhfr gung lr
unir qrfcvfrq gur YBEQ juvpu vf nzbat lbh, naq unir jrcg orsber uvz,
fnlvat, Jul pnzr jr sbegu bhg bs Rtlcg?  11:21 Naq Zbfrf fnvq, Gur
crbcyr, nzbat jubz V nz, ner fvk uhaqerq gubhfnaq sbbgzra; naq gubh
unfg fnvq, V jvyy tvir gurz syrfu, gung gurl znl rng n jubyr zbagu.

11:22 Funyy gur sybpxf naq gur ureqf or fynva sbe gurz, gb fhssvpr
gurz?  be funyy nyy gur svfu bs gur frn or tngurerq gbtrgure sbe gurz,
gb fhssvpr gurz?  11:23 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Vf gur YBEQ'f
unaq jnkrq fubeg? gubh funyg frr abj jurgure zl jbeq funyy pbzr gb
cnff hagb gurr be abg.

11:24 Naq Zbfrf jrag bhg, naq gbyq gur crbcyr gur jbeqf bs gur YBEQ,
naq tngurerq gur friragl zra bs gur ryqref bs gur crbcyr, naq frg gurz
ebhaq nobhg gur gnoreanpyr.

11:25 Naq gur YBEQ pnzr qbja va n pybhq, naq fcnxr hagb uvz, naq gbbx
bs gur fcvevg gung jnf hcba uvz, naq tnir vg hagb gur friragl ryqref:
naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung, jura gur fcvevg erfgrq hcba gurz, gurl
cebcurfvrq, naq qvq abg prnfr.

11:26 Ohg gurer erznvarq gjb bs gur zra va gur pnzc, gur anzr bs gur
bar jnf Ryqnq, naq gur anzr bs gur bgure Zrqnq: naq gur fcvevg erfgrq
hcba gurz; naq gurl jrer bs gurz gung jrer jevggra, ohg jrag abg bhg
hagb gur gnoreanpyr: naq gurl cebcurfvrq va gur pnzc.

11:27 Naq gurer ena n lbhat zna, naq gbyq Zbfrf, naq fnvq, Ryqnq naq
Zrqnq qb cebcurfl va gur pnzc.

11:28 Naq Wbfuhn gur fba bs Aha, gur freinag bs Zbfrf, bar bs uvf
lbhat zra, nafjrerq naq fnvq, Zl ybeq Zbfrf, sbeovq gurz.

11:29 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb uvz, Raivrfg gubh sbe zl fnxr? jbhyq Tbq
gung nyy gur YBEQ'f crbcyr jrer cebcurgf, naq gung gur YBEQ jbhyq chg
uvf fcvevg hcba gurz!  11:30 Naq Zbfrf tng uvz vagb gur pnzc, ur naq
gur ryqref bs Vfenry.

11:31 Naq gurer jrag sbegu n jvaq sebz gur YBEQ, naq oebhtug dhnvyf
sebz gur frn, naq yrg gurz snyy ol gur pnzc, nf vg jrer n qnl'f
wbhearl ba guvf fvqr, naq nf vg jrer n qnl'f wbhearl ba gur bgure
fvqr, ebhaq nobhg gur pnzc, naq nf vg jrer gjb phovgf uvtu hcba gur
snpr bs gur rnegu.

11:32 Naq gur crbcyr fgbbq hc nyy gung qnl, naq nyy gung avtug, naq
nyy gur arkg qnl, naq gurl tngurerq gur dhnvyf: ur gung tngurerq yrnfg
tngurerq gra ubzref: naq gurl fcernq gurz nyy noebnq sbe gurzfryirf
ebhaq nobhg gur pnzc.

11:33 Naq juvyr gur syrfu jnf lrg orgjrra gurve grrgu, rer vg jnf
purjrq, gur jengu bs gur YBEQ jnf xvaqyrq ntnvafg gur crbcyr, naq gur
YBEQ fzbgr gur crbcyr jvgu n irel terng cynthr.

11:34 Naq ur pnyyrq gur anzr bs gung cynpr Xvoebguunggnninu: orpnhfr
gurer gurl ohevrq gur crbcyr gung yhfgrq.

11:35 Naq gur crbcyr wbhearlrq sebz Xvoebguunggnninu hagb Unmrebgu;
naq nobqr ng Unmrebgu.

12:1 Naq Zvevnz naq Nneba fcnxr ntnvafg Zbfrf orpnhfr bs gur Rguvbcvna
jbzna jubz ur unq zneevrq: sbe ur unq zneevrq na Rguvbcvna jbzna.

12:2 Naq gurl fnvq, Ungu gur YBEQ vaqrrq fcbxra bayl ol Zbfrf? ungu ur
abg fcbxra nyfb ol hf? Naq gur YBEQ urneq vg.

12:3 (Abj gur zna Zbfrf jnf irel zrrx, nobir nyy gur zra juvpu jrer
hcba gur snpr bs gur rnegu.)  12:4 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr fhqqrayl hagb
Zbfrf, naq hagb Nneba, naq hagb Zvevnz, Pbzr bhg lr guerr hagb gur
gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba. Naq gurl guerr pnzr bhg.

12:5 Naq gur YBEQ pnzr qbja va gur cvyyne bs gur pybhq, naq fgbbq va
gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr, naq pnyyrq Nneba naq Zvevnz: naq gurl obgu
pnzr sbegu.

12:6 Naq ur fnvq, Urne abj zl jbeqf: Vs gurer or n cebcurg nzbat lbh,
V gur YBEQ jvyy znxr zlfrys xabja hagb uvz va n ivfvba, naq jvyy fcrnx
hagb uvz va n qernz.

12:7 Zl freinag Zbfrf vf abg fb, jub vf snvgushy va nyy zvar ubhfr.

12:8 Jvgu uvz jvyy V fcrnx zbhgu gb zbhgu, rira nccneragyl, naq abg va
qnex fcrrpurf; naq gur fvzvyvghqr bs gur YBEQ funyy ur orubyq:
jurersber gura jrer lr abg nsenvq gb fcrnx ntnvafg zl freinag Zbfrf?
12:9 Naq gur natre bs gur YBEQ jnf xvaqyrq ntnvafg gurz; naq ur
qrcnegrq.

12:10 Naq gur pybhq qrcnegrq sebz bss gur gnoreanpyr; naq, orubyq,
Zvevnz orpnzr yrcebhf, juvgr nf fabj: naq Nneba ybbxrq hcba Zvevnz,
naq, orubyq, fur jnf yrcebhf.

12:11 Naq Nneba fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Nynf, zl ybeq, V orfrrpu gurr, ynl
abg gur fva hcba hf, jurerva jr unir qbar sbbyvfuyl, naq jurerva jr
unir fvaarq.

12:12 Yrg ure abg or nf bar qrnq, bs jubz gur syrfu vf unys pbafhzrq
jura ur pbzrgu bhg bs uvf zbgure'f jbzo.

12:13 Naq Zbfrf pevrq hagb gur YBEQ, fnlvat, Urny ure abj, B Tbq, V
orfrrpu gurr.

12:14 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Vs ure sngure unq ohg fcvg va ure
snpr, fubhyq fur abg or nfunzrq frira qnlf? yrg ure or fuhg bhg sebz
gur pnzc frira qnlf, naq nsgre gung yrg ure or erprvirq va ntnva.

12:15 Naq Zvevnz jnf fuhg bhg sebz gur pnzc frira qnlf: naq gur crbcyr
wbhearlrq abg gvyy Zvevnz jnf oebhtug va ntnva.

12:16 Naq nsgrejneq gur crbcyr erzbirq sebz Unmrebgu, naq cvgpurq va
gur jvyqrearff bs Cnena.

13:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 13:2 Fraq gubh zra, gung
gurl znl frnepu gur ynaq bs Pnanna, juvpu V tvir hagb gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry: bs rirel gevor bs gurve snguref funyy lr fraq n zna, rirel bar
n ehyre nzbat gurz.

13:3 Naq Zbfrf ol gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ frag gurz sebz gur
jvyqrearff bs Cnena: nyy gubfr zra jrer urnqf bs gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry.

13:4 Naq gurfr jrer gurve anzrf: bs gur gevor bs Erhora, Funzzhn gur
fba bs Mnpphe.

13:5 Bs gur gevor bs Fvzrba, Funcung gur fba bs Ubev.

13:6 Bs gur gevor bs Whqnu, Pnyro gur fba bs Wrcuhaaru.

13:7 Bs gur gevor bs Vffnpune, Vtny gur fba bs Wbfrcu.

13:8 Bs gur gevor bs Rcuenvz, Bfurn gur fba bs Aha.

13:9 Bs gur gevor bs Orawnzva, Cnygv gur fba bs Encuh.

13:10 Bs gur gevor bs Mrohyha, Tnqqvry gur fba bs Fbqv.

13:11 Bs gur gevor bs Wbfrcu, anzryl, bs gur gevor bs Znanffru, Tnqqv
gur fba bs Fhfv.

13:12 Bs gur gevor bs Qna, Nzzvry gur fba bs Trznyyv.

13:13 Bs gur gevor bs Nfure, Frguhe gur fba bs Zvpunry.

13:14 Bs gur gevor bs Ancugnyv, Anuov gur fba bs Ibcufv.

13:15 Bs gur gevor bs Tnq, Trhry gur fba bs Znpuv.

13:16 Gurfr ner gur anzrf bs gur zra juvpu Zbfrf frag gb fcl bhg gur
ynaq.

Naq Zbfrf pnyyrq Bfurn gur fba bs Aha Wrubfuhn.

13:17 Naq Zbfrf frag gurz gb fcl bhg gur ynaq bs Pnanna, naq fnvq hagb
gurz, Trg lbh hc guvf jnl fbhgujneq, naq tb hc vagb gur zbhagnva:
13:18 Naq frr gur ynaq, jung vg vf, naq gur crbcyr gung qjryyrgu
gurerva, jurgure gurl or fgebat be jrnx, srj be znal; 13:19 Naq jung
gur ynaq vf gung gurl qjryy va, jurgure vg or tbbq be onq; naq jung
pvgvrf gurl or gung gurl qjryy va, jurgure va gragf, be va fgebat
ubyqf; 13:20 Naq jung gur ynaq vf, jurgure vg or sng be yrna, jurgure
gurer or jbbq gurerva, be abg. Naq or lr bs tbbq pbhentr, naq oevat bs
gur sehvg bs gur ynaq. Abj gur gvzr jnf gur gvzr bs gur svefgevcr
tencrf.

13:21 Fb gurl jrag hc, naq frnepurq gur ynaq sebz gur jvyqrearff bs
Mva hagb Erubo, nf zra pbzr gb Unzngu.

13:22 Naq gurl nfpraqrq ol gur fbhgu, naq pnzr hagb Uroeba; jurer
Nuvzna, Furfunv, naq Gnyznv, gur puvyqera bs Nanx, jrer. (Abj Uroeba
jnf ohvyg frira lrnef orsber Mbna va Rtlcg.)  13:23 Naq gurl pnzr hagb
gur oebbx bs Rfupby, naq phg qbja sebz gurapr n oenapu jvgu bar
pyhfgre bs tencrf, naq gurl oner vg orgjrra gjb hcba n fgnss; naq gurl
oebhtug bs gur cbzrtenangrf, naq bs gur svtf.

13:24 Gur cynpr jnf pnyyrq gur oebbx Rfupby, orpnhfr bs gur pyhfgre bs
tencrf juvpu gur puvyqera bs Vfenry phg qbja sebz gurapr.

13:25 Naq gurl erghearq sebz frnepuvat bs gur ynaq nsgre sbegl qnlf.

13:26 Naq gurl jrag naq pnzr gb Zbfrf, naq gb Nneba, naq gb nyy gur
pbatertngvba bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, hagb gur jvyqrearff bs Cnena,
gb Xnqrfu; naq oebhtug onpx jbeq hagb gurz, naq hagb nyy gur
pbatertngvba, naq furjrq gurz gur sehvg bs gur ynaq.

13:27 Naq gurl gbyq uvz, naq fnvq, Jr pnzr hagb gur ynaq juvgure gubh
fragrfg hf, naq fheryl vg sybjrgu jvgu zvyx naq ubarl; naq guvf vf gur
sehvg bs vg.

13:28 Arireguryrff gur crbcyr or fgebat gung qjryy va gur ynaq, naq
gur pvgvrf ner jnyyrq, naq irel terng: naq zberbire jr fnj gur
puvyqera bs Nanx gurer.

13:29 Gur Nznyrxvgrf qjryy va gur ynaq bs gur fbhgu: naq gur Uvggvgrf,
naq gur Wrohfvgrf, naq gur Nzbevgrf, qjryy va gur zbhagnvaf: naq gur
Pnannavgrf qjryy ol gur frn, naq ol gur pbnfg bs Wbeqna.

13:30 Naq Pnyro fgvyyrq gur crbcyr orsber Zbfrf, naq fnvq, Yrg hf tb
hc ng bapr, naq cbffrff vg; sbe jr ner jryy noyr gb birepbzr vg.

13:31 Ohg gur zra gung jrag hc jvgu uvz fnvq, Jr or abg noyr gb tb hc
ntnvafg gur crbcyr; sbe gurl ner fgebatre guna jr.

13:32 Naq gurl oebhtug hc na rivy ercbeg bs gur ynaq juvpu gurl unq
frnepurq hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Gur ynaq, guebhtu juvpu
jr unir tbar gb frnepu vg, vf n ynaq gung rngrgu hc gur vaunovgnagf
gurerbs; naq nyy gur crbcyr gung jr fnj va vg ner zra bs n terng
fgngher.

13:33 Naq gurer jr fnj gur tvnagf, gur fbaf bs Nanx, juvpu pbzr bs gur
tvnagf: naq jr jrer va bhe bja fvtug nf tenffubccref, naq fb jr jrer
va gurve fvtug.

14:1 Naq nyy gur pbatertngvba yvsgrq hc gurve ibvpr, naq pevrq; naq
gur crbcyr jrcg gung avtug.

14:2 Naq nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry zhezherq ntnvafg Zbfrf naq ntnvafg
Nneba: naq gur jubyr pbatertngvba fnvq hagb gurz, Jbhyq Tbq gung jr
unq qvrq va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg! be jbhyq Tbq jr unq qvrq va guvf
jvyqrearff!  14:3 Naq jurersber ungu gur YBEQ oebhtug hf hagb guvf
ynaq, gb snyy ol gur fjbeq, gung bhe jvirf naq bhe puvyqera fubhyq or
n cerl? jrer vg abg orggre sbe hf gb erghea vagb Rtlcg?  14:4 Naq gurl
fnvq bar gb nabgure, Yrg hf znxr n pncgnva, naq yrg hf erghea vagb
Rtlcg.

14:5 Gura Zbfrf naq Nneba sryy ba gurve snprf orsber nyy gur nffrzoyl
bs gur pbatertngvba bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

14:6 Naq Wbfuhn gur fba bs Aha, naq Pnyro gur fba bs Wrcuhaaru, juvpu
jrer bs gurz gung frnepurq gur ynaq, erag gurve pybgurf: 14:7 Naq gurl
fcnxr hagb nyy gur pbzcnal bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Gur
ynaq, juvpu jr cnffrq guebhtu gb frnepu vg, vf na rkprrqvat tbbq ynaq.

14:8 Vs gur YBEQ qryvtug va hf, gura ur jvyy oevat hf vagb guvf ynaq,
naq tvir vg hf; n ynaq juvpu sybjrgu jvgu zvyx naq ubarl.

14:9 Bayl erory abg lr ntnvafg gur YBEQ, arvgure srne lr gur crbcyr bs
gur ynaq; sbe gurl ner oernq sbe hf: gurve qrsrapr vf qrcnegrq sebz
gurz, naq gur YBEQ vf jvgu hf: srne gurz abg.

14:10 Ohg nyy gur pbatertngvba onqr fgbar gurz jvgu fgbarf. Naq gur
tybel bs gur YBEQ nccrnerq va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba
orsber nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

14:11 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Ubj ybat jvyy guvf crbcyr cebibxr
zr?  naq ubj ybat jvyy vg or rer gurl oryvrir zr, sbe nyy gur fvtaf
juvpu V unir furjrq nzbat gurz?  14:12 V jvyy fzvgr gurz jvgu gur
crfgvyrapr, naq qvfvaurevg gurz, naq jvyy znxr bs gurr n terngre
angvba naq zvtugvre guna gurl.

14:13 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb gur YBEQ, Gura gur Rtlcgvnaf funyy urne vg,
(sbe gubh oebhtugrfg hc guvf crbcyr va gul zvtug sebz nzbat gurz;)
14:14 Naq gurl jvyy gryy vg gb gur vaunovgnagf bs guvf ynaq: sbe gurl
unir urneq gung gubh YBEQ neg nzbat guvf crbcyr, gung gubh YBEQ neg
frra snpr gb snpr, naq gung gul pybhq fgnaqrgu bire gurz, naq gung
gubh tbrfg orsber gurz, ol qnl gvzr va n cvyyne bs n pybhq, naq va n
cvyyne bs sver ol avtug.

14:15 Abj vs gubh funyg xvyy nyy guvf crbcyr nf bar zna, gura gur
angvbaf juvpu unir urneq gur snzr bs gurr jvyy fcrnx, fnlvat, 14:16
Orpnhfr gur YBEQ jnf abg noyr gb oevat guvf crbcyr vagb gur ynaq juvpu
ur fjner hagb gurz, gurersber ur ungu fynva gurz va gur jvyqrearff.

14:17 Naq abj, V orfrrpu gurr, yrg gur cbjre bs zl YBEQ or terng,
nppbeqvat nf gubh unfg fcbxra, fnlvat, 14:18 Gur YBEQ vf
ybatfhssrevat, naq bs terng zrepl, sbetvivat vavdhvgl naq
genafterffvba, naq ol ab zrnaf pyrnevat gur thvygl, ivfvgvat gur
vavdhvgl bs gur snguref hcba gur puvyqera hagb gur guveq naq sbhegu
trarengvba.

14:19 Cneqba, V orfrrpu gurr, gur vavdhvgl bs guvf crbcyr nppbeqvat
hagb gur terngarff bs gul zrepl, naq nf gubh unfg sbetvira guvf
crbcyr, sebz Rtlcg rira hagvy abj.

14:20 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq, V unir cneqbarq nppbeqvat gb gul jbeq: 14:21
Ohg nf gehyl nf V yvir, nyy gur rnegu funyy or svyyrq jvgu gur tybel
bs gur YBEQ.

14:22 Orpnhfr nyy gubfr zra juvpu unir frra zl tybel, naq zl zvenpyrf,
juvpu V qvq va Rtlcg naq va gur jvyqrearff, naq unir grzcgrq zr abj
gurfr gra gvzrf, naq unir abg urnexrarq gb zl ibvpr; 14:23 Fheryl gurl
funyy abg frr gur ynaq juvpu V fjner hagb gurve snguref, arvgure funyy
nal bs gurz gung cebibxrq zr frr vg: 14:24 Ohg zl freinag Pnyro,
orpnhfr ur unq nabgure fcvevg jvgu uvz, naq ungu sbyybjrq zr shyyl,
uvz jvyy V oevat vagb gur ynaq jurervagb ur jrag; naq uvf frrq funyy
cbffrff vg.

14:25 (Abj gur Nznyrxvgrf naq gur Pnannavgrf qjryg va gur inyyrl.)
Gbzbeebj ghea lbh, naq trg lbh vagb gur jvyqrearff ol gur jnl bs gur
Erq frn.

14:26 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf naq hagb Nneba, fnlvat, 14:27 Ubj
ybat funyy V orne jvgu guvf rivy pbatertngvba, juvpu zhezhe ntnvafg
zr? V unir urneq gur zhezhevatf bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, juvpu gurl
zhezhe ntnvafg zr.

14:28 Fnl hagb gurz, Nf gehyl nf V yvir, fnvgu gur YBEQ, nf lr unir
fcbxra va zvar rnef, fb jvyy V qb gb lbh: 14:29 Lbhe pnepnfrf funyy
snyy va guvf jvyqrearff; naq nyy gung jrer ahzorerq bs lbh, nppbeqvat
gb lbhe jubyr ahzore, sebz gjragl lrnef byq naq hcjneq juvpu unir
zhezherq ntnvafg zr.

14:30 Qbhogyrff lr funyy abg pbzr vagb gur ynaq, pbapreavat juvpu V
fjner gb znxr lbh qjryy gurerva, fnir Pnyro gur fba bs Wrcuhaaru, naq
Wbfuhn gur fba bs Aha.

14:31 Ohg lbhe yvggyr barf, juvpu lr fnvq fubhyq or n cerl, gurz jvyy
V oevat va, naq gurl funyy xabj gur ynaq juvpu lr unir qrfcvfrq.

14:32 Ohg nf sbe lbh, lbhe pnepnfrf, gurl funyy snyy va guvf
jvyqrearff.

14:33 Naq lbhe puvyqera funyy jnaqre va gur jvyqrearff sbegl lrnef,
naq orne lbhe juberqbzf, hagvy lbhe pnepnfrf or jnfgrq va gur
jvyqrearff.

14:34 Nsgre gur ahzore bs gur qnlf va juvpu lr frnepurq gur ynaq, rira
sbegl qnlf, rnpu qnl sbe n lrne, funyy lr orne lbhe vavdhvgvrf, rira
sbegl lrnef, naq lr funyy xabj zl oernpu bs cebzvfr.

14:35 V gur YBEQ unir fnvq, V jvyy fheryl qb vg hagb nyy guvf rivy
pbatertngvba, gung ner tngurerq gbtrgure ntnvafg zr: va guvf
jvyqrearff gurl funyy or pbafhzrq, naq gurer gurl funyy qvr.

14:36 Naq gur zra, juvpu Zbfrf frag gb frnepu gur ynaq, jub erghearq,
naq znqr nyy gur pbatertngvba gb zhezhe ntnvafg uvz, ol oevatvat hc n
fynaqre hcba gur ynaq, 14:37 Rira gubfr zra gung qvq oevat hc gur rivy
ercbeg hcba gur ynaq, qvrq ol gur cynthr orsber gur YBEQ.

14:38 Ohg Wbfuhn gur fba bs Aha, naq Pnyro gur fba bs Wrcuhaaru, juvpu
jrer bs gur zra gung jrag gb frnepu gur ynaq, yvirq fgvyy.

14:39 Naq Zbfrf gbyq gurfr fnlvatf hagb nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry:
naq gur crbcyr zbhearq terngyl.

14:40 Naq gurl ebfr hc rneyl va gur zbeavat, naq tng gurz hc vagb gur
gbc bs gur zbhagnva, fnlvat, Yb, jr or urer, naq jvyy tb hc hagb gur
cynpr juvpu gur YBEQ ungu cebzvfrq: sbe jr unir fvaarq.

14:41 Naq Zbfrf fnvq, Jurersber abj qb lr genafterff gur pbzznaqzrag
bs gur YBEQ? ohg vg funyy abg cebfcre.

14:42 Tb abg hc, sbe gur YBEQ vf abg nzbat lbh; gung lr or abg fzvggra
orsber lbhe rarzvrf.

14:43 Sbe gur Nznyrxvgrf naq gur Pnannavgrf ner gurer orsber lbh, naq
lr funyy snyy ol gur fjbeq: orpnhfr lr ner ghearq njnl sebz gur YBEQ,
gurersber gur YBEQ jvyy abg or jvgu lbh.

14:44 Ohg gurl cerfhzrq gb tb hc hagb gur uvyy gbc: arireguryrff gur
nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ, naq Zbfrf, qrcnegrq abg bhg bs gur
pnzc.

14:45 Gura gur Nznyrxvgrf pnzr qbja, naq gur Pnannavgrf juvpu qjryg va
gung uvyy, naq fzbgr gurz, naq qvfpbzsvgrq gurz, rira hagb Ubeznu.

15:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 15:2 Fcrnx hagb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq fnl hagb gurz, Jura lr or pbzr vagb gur ynaq
bs lbhe unovgngvbaf, juvpu V tvir hagb lbh, 15:3 Naq jvyy znxr na
bssrevat ol sver hagb gur YBEQ, n oheag bssrevat, be n fnpevsvpr va
cresbezvat n ibj, be va n serrjvyy bssrevat, be va lbhe fbyrza srnfgf,
gb znxr n fjrrg fnibhe hagb gur YBEQ, bs gur ureq be bs gur sybpx:
15:4 Gura funyy ur gung bssrergu uvf bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ oevat n
zrng bssrevat bs n gragu qrny bs sybhe zvatyrq jvgu gur sbhegu cneg bs
na uva bs bvy.

15:5 Naq gur sbhegu cneg bs na uva bs jvar sbe n qevax bssrevat funyg
gubh cercner jvgu gur oheag bssrevat be fnpevsvpr, sbe bar ynzo.

15:6 Be sbe n enz, gubh funyg cercner sbe n zrng bssrevat gjb gragu
qrnyf bs sybhe zvatyrq jvgu gur guveq cneg bs na uva bs bvy.

15:7 Naq sbe n qevax bssrevat gubh funyg bssre gur guveq cneg bs na
uva bs jvar, sbe n fjrrg fnibhe hagb gur YBEQ.

15:8 Naq jura gubh cercnerfg n ohyybpx sbe n oheag bssrevat, be sbe n
fnpevsvpr va cresbezvat n ibj, be crnpr bssrevatf hagb gur YBEQ: 15:9
Gura funyy ur oevat jvgu n ohyybpx n zrng bssrevat bs guerr gragu
qrnyf bs sybhe zvatyrq jvgu unys na uva bs bvy.

15:10 Naq gubh funyg oevat sbe n qevax bssrevat unys na uva bs jvar,
sbe na bssrevat znqr ol sver, bs n fjrrg fnibhe hagb gur YBEQ.

15:11 Guhf funyy vg or qbar sbe bar ohyybpx, be sbe bar enz, be sbe n
ynzo, be n xvq.

15:12 Nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore gung lr funyy cercner, fb funyy lr qb gb
rirel bar nppbeqvat gb gurve ahzore.

15:13 Nyy gung ner obea bs gur pbhagel funyy qb gurfr guvatf nsgre
guvf znaare, va bssrevat na bssrevat znqr ol sver, bs n fjrrg fnibhe
hagb gur YBEQ.

15:14 Naq vs n fgenatre fbwbhea jvgu lbh, be jubfbrire or nzbat lbh va
lbhe trarengvbaf, naq jvyy bssre na bssrevat znqr ol sver, bs n fjrrg
fnibhe hagb gur YBEQ; nf lr qb, fb ur funyy qb.

15:15 Bar beqvanapr funyy or obgu sbe lbh bs gur pbatertngvba, naq
nyfb sbe gur fgenatre gung fbwbheargu jvgu lbh, na beqvanapr sbe rire
va lbhe trarengvbaf: nf lr ner, fb funyy gur fgenatre or orsber gur
YBEQ.

15:16 Bar ynj naq bar znaare funyy or sbe lbh, naq sbe gur fgenatre
gung fbwbheargu jvgu lbh.

15:17 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 15:18 Fcrnx hagb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq fnl hagb gurz, Jura lr pbzr vagb gur ynaq
juvgure V oevat lbh, 15:19 Gura vg funyy or, gung, jura lr rng bs gur
oernq bs gur ynaq, lr funyy bssre hc na urnir bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ.

15:20 Lr funyy bssre hc n pnxr bs gur svefg bs lbhe qbhtu sbe na urnir
bssrevat: nf lr qb gur urnir bssrevat bs gur guerfuvatsybbe, fb funyy
lr urnir vg.

15:21 Bs gur svefg bs lbhe qbhtu lr funyy tvir hagb gur YBEQ na urnir
bssrevat va lbhe trarengvbaf.

15:22 Naq vs lr unir reerq, naq abg bofreirq nyy gurfr pbzznaqzragf,
juvpu gur YBEQ ungu fcbxra hagb Zbfrf, 15:23 Rira nyy gung gur YBEQ
ungu pbzznaqrq lbh ol gur unaq bs Zbfrf, sebz gur qnl gung gur YBEQ
pbzznaqrq Zbfrf, naq uraprsbejneq nzbat lbhe trarengvbaf; 15:24 Gura
vg funyy or, vs bhtug or pbzzvggrq ol vtabenapr jvgubhg gur xabjyrqtr
bs gur pbatertngvba, gung nyy gur pbatertngvba funyy bssre bar lbhat
ohyybpx sbe n oheag bssrevat, sbe n fjrrg fnibhe hagb gur YBEQ, jvgu
uvf zrng bssrevat, naq uvf qevax bssrevat, nppbeqvat gb gur znaare,
naq bar xvq bs gur tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat.

15:25 Naq gur cevrfg funyy znxr na ngbarzrag sbe nyy gur pbatertngvba
bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq vg funyy or sbetvira gurz; sbe vg vf
vtabenapr: naq gurl funyy oevat gurve bssrevat, n fnpevsvpr znqr ol
sver hagb gur YBEQ, naq gurve fva bssrevat orsber gur YBEQ, sbe gurve
vtabenapr: 15:26 Naq vg funyy or sbetvira nyy gur pbatertngvba bs gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq gur fgenatre gung fbwbheargu nzbat gurz;
frrvat nyy gur crbcyr jrer va vtabenapr.

15:27 Naq vs nal fbhy fva guebhtu vtabenapr, gura ur funyy oevat n fur
tbng bs gur svefg lrne sbe n fva bssrevat.

15:28 Naq gur cevrfg funyy znxr na ngbarzrag sbe gur fbhy gung fvaargu
vtabenagyl, jura ur fvaargu ol vtabenapr orsber gur YBEQ, gb znxr na
ngbarzrag sbe uvz; naq vg funyy or sbetvira uvz.

15:29 Lr funyy unir bar ynj sbe uvz gung fvaargu guebhtu vtabenapr,
obgu sbe uvz gung vf obea nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq sbe gur
fgenatre gung fbwbheargu nzbat gurz.

15:30 Ohg gur fbhy gung qbrgu bhtug cerfhzcghbhfyl, jurgure ur or obea
va gur ynaq, be n fgenatre, gur fnzr ercebnpurgu gur YBEQ; naq gung
fbhy funyy or phg bss sebz nzbat uvf crbcyr.

15:31 Orpnhfr ur ungu qrfcvfrq gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ, naq ungu oebxra
uvf pbzznaqzrag, gung fbhy funyy hggreyl or phg bss; uvf vavdhvgl
funyy or hcba uvz.

15:32 Naq juvyr gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jrer va gur jvyqrearff, gurl
sbhaq n zna gung tngurerq fgvpxf hcba gur fnoongu qnl.

15:33 Naq gurl gung sbhaq uvz tngurevat fgvpxf oebhtug uvz hagb Zbfrf
naq Nneba, naq hagb nyy gur pbatertngvba.

15:34 Naq gurl chg uvz va jneq, orpnhfr vg jnf abg qrpynerq jung
fubhyq or qbar gb uvz.

15:35 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Gur zna funyy or fheryl chg gb
qrngu: nyy gur pbatertngvba funyy fgbar uvz jvgu fgbarf jvgubhg gur
pnzc.

15:36 Naq nyy gur pbatertngvba oebhtug uvz jvgubhg gur pnzc, naq
fgbarq uvz jvgu fgbarf, naq ur qvrq; nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

15:37 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 15:38 Fcrnx hagb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq ovq gurz gung gurl znxr gurz sevatrf va gur
obeqref bs gurve tnezragf guebhtubhg gurve trarengvbaf, naq gung gurl
chg hcba gur sevatr bs gur obeqref n evoonaq bs oyhr: 15:39 Naq vg
funyy or hagb lbh sbe n sevatr, gung lr znl ybbx hcba vg, naq erzrzore
nyy gur pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ, naq qb gurz; naq gung lr frrx abg
nsgre lbhe bja urneg naq lbhe bja rlrf, nsgre juvpu lr hfr gb tb n
jubevat: 15:40 Gung lr znl erzrzore, naq qb nyy zl pbzznaqzragf, naq
or ubyl hagb lbhe Tbq.

15:41 V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, juvpu oebhtug lbh bhg bs gur ynaq bs
Rtlcg, gb or lbhe Tbq: V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

16:1 Abj Xbenu, gur fba bs Vmune, gur fba bs Xbungu, gur fba bs Yriv,
naq Qnguna naq Novenz, gur fbaf bs Ryvno, naq Ba, gur fba bs Cryrgu,
fbaf bs Erhora, gbbx zra: 16:2 Naq gurl ebfr hc orsber Zbfrf, jvgu
pregnva bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, gjb uhaqerq naq svsgl cevaprf bs
gur nffrzoyl, snzbhf va gur pbatertngvba, zra bs erabja: 16:3 Naq gurl
tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure ntnvafg Zbfrf naq ntnvafg Nneba, naq fnvq
hagb gurz, Lr gnxr gbb zhpu hcba lbh, frrvat nyy gur pbatertngvba ner
ubyl, rirel bar bs gurz, naq gur YBEQ vf nzbat gurz: jurersber gura
yvsg lr hc lbhefryirf nobir gur pbatertngvba bs gur YBEQ?  16:4 Naq
jura Zbfrf urneq vg, ur sryy hcba uvf snpr: 16:5 Naq ur fcnxr hagb
Xbenu naq hagb nyy uvf pbzcnal, fnlvat, Rira gb zbeebj gur YBEQ jvyy
furj jub ner uvf, naq jub vf ubyl; naq jvyy pnhfr uvz gb pbzr arne
hagb uvz: rira uvz jubz ur ungu pubfra jvyy ur pnhfr gb pbzr arne hagb
uvz.

16:6 Guvf qb; Gnxr lbh prafref, Xbenu, naq nyy uvf pbzcnal; 16:7 Naq
chg sver gurerva, naq chg vaprafr va gurz orsber gur YBEQ gb zbeebj:
naq vg funyy or gung gur zna jubz gur YBEQ qbgu pubbfr, ur funyy or
ubyl: lr gnxr gbb zhpu hcba lbh, lr fbaf bs Yriv.

16:8 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb Xbenu, Urne, V cenl lbh, lr fbaf bs Yriv:
16:9 Frrzrgu vg ohg n fznyy guvat hagb lbh, gung gur Tbq bs Vfenry
ungu frcnengrq lbh sebz gur pbatertngvba bs Vfenry, gb oevat lbh arne
gb uvzfrys gb qb gur freivpr bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur YBEQ, naq gb
fgnaq orsber gur pbatertngvba gb zvavfgre hagb gurz?  16:10 Naq ur
ungu oebhtug gurr arne gb uvz, naq nyy gul oerguera gur fbaf bs Yriv
jvgu gurr: naq frrx lr gur cevrfgubbq nyfb?  16:11 Sbe juvpu pnhfr
obgu gubh naq nyy gul pbzcnal ner tngurerq gbtrgure ntnvafg gur YBEQ:
naq jung vf Nneba, gung lr zhezhe ntnvafg uvz?  16:12 Naq Zbfrf frag
gb pnyy Qnguna naq Novenz, gur fbaf bs Ryvno: juvpu fnvq, Jr jvyy abg
pbzr hc: 16:13 Vf vg n fznyy guvat gung gubh unfg oebhtug hf hc bhg bs
n ynaq gung sybjrgu jvgu zvyx naq ubarl, gb xvyy hf va gur jvyqrearff,
rkprcg gubh znxr gulfrys nygbtrgure n cevapr bire hf?  16:14 Zberbire
gubh unfg abg oebhtug hf vagb n ynaq gung sybjrgu jvgu zvyx naq ubarl,
be tvira hf vaurevgnapr bs svryqf naq ivarlneqf: jvyg gubh chg bhg gur
rlrf bs gurfr zra? jr jvyy abg pbzr hc.

16:15 Naq Zbfrf jnf irel jebgu, naq fnvq hagb gur YBEQ, Erfcrpg abg
gubh gurve bssrevat: V unir abg gnxra bar nff sebz gurz, arvgure unir
V uheg bar bs gurz.

16:16 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb Xbenu, Or gubh naq nyy gul pbzcnal orsber
gur YBEQ, gubh, naq gurl, naq Nneba, gb zbeebj: 16:17 Naq gnxr rirel
zna uvf prafre, naq chg vaprafr va gurz, naq oevat lr orsber gur YBEQ
rirel zna uvf prafre, gjb uhaqerq naq svsgl prafref; gubh nyfb, naq
Nneba, rnpu bs lbh uvf prafre.

16:18 Naq gurl gbbx rirel zna uvf prafre, naq chg sver va gurz, naq
ynvq vaprafr gurerba, naq fgbbq va gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba jvgu Zbfrf naq Nneba.

16:19 Naq Xbenu tngurerq nyy gur pbatertngvba ntnvafg gurz hagb gur
qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba: naq gur tybel bs gur YBEQ
nccrnerq hagb nyy gur pbatertngvba.

16:20 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf naq hagb Nneba, fnlvat, 16:21
Frcnengr lbhefryirf sebz nzbat guvf pbatertngvba, gung V znl pbafhzr
gurz va n zbzrag.

16:22 Naq gurl sryy hcba gurve snprf, naq fnvq, B Tbq, gur Tbq bs gur
fcvevgf bs nyy syrfu, funyy bar zna fva, naq jvyg gubh or jebgu jvgu
nyy gur pbatertngvba?  16:23 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat,
16:24 Fcrnx hagb gur pbatertngvba, fnlvat, Trg lbh hc sebz nobhg gur
gnoreanpyr bs Xbenu, Qnguna, naq Novenz.

16:25 Naq Zbfrf ebfr hc naq jrag hagb Qnguna naq Novenz; naq gur
ryqref bs Vfenry sbyybjrq uvz.

16:26 Naq ur fcnxr hagb gur pbatertngvba, fnlvat, Qrcneg, V cenl lbh,
sebz gur gragf bs gurfr jvpxrq zra, naq gbhpu abguvat bs gurve'f, yrfg
lr or pbafhzrq va nyy gurve fvaf.

16:27 Fb gurl tng hc sebz gur gnoreanpyr bs Xbenu, Qnguna, naq Novenz,
ba rirel fvqr: naq Qnguna naq Novenz pnzr bhg, naq fgbbq va gur qbbe
bs gurve gragf, naq gurve jvirf, naq gurve fbaf, naq gurve yvggyr
puvyqera.

16:28 Naq Zbfrf fnvq, Urerol lr funyy xabj gung gur YBEQ ungu frag zr
gb qb nyy gurfr jbexf; sbe V unir abg qbar gurz bs zvar bja zvaq.

16:29 Vs gurfr zra qvr gur pbzzba qrngu bs nyy zra, be vs gurl or
ivfvgrq nsgre gur ivfvgngvba bs nyy zra; gura gur YBEQ ungu abg frag
zr.

16:30 Ohg vs gur YBEQ znxr n arj guvat, naq gur rnegu bcra ure zbhgu,
naq fjnyybj gurz hc, jvgu nyy gung nccregnva hagb gurz, naq gurl tb
qbja dhvpx vagb gur cvg; gura lr funyy haqrefgnaq gung gurfr zra unir
cebibxrq gur YBEQ.

16:31 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf ur unq znqr na raq bs fcrnxvat nyy gurfr
jbeqf, gung gur tebhaq pynir nfhaqre gung jnf haqre gurz: 16:32 Naq
gur rnegu bcrarq ure zbhgu, naq fjnyybjrq gurz hc, naq gurve ubhfrf,
naq nyy gur zra gung nccregnvarq hagb Xbenu, naq nyy gurve tbbqf.

16:33 Gurl, naq nyy gung nccregnvarq gb gurz, jrag qbja nyvir vagb gur
cvg, naq gur rnegu pybfrq hcba gurz: naq gurl crevfurq sebz nzbat gur
pbatertngvba.

16:34 Naq nyy Vfenry gung jrer ebhaq nobhg gurz syrq ng gur pel bs
gurz: sbe gurl fnvq, Yrfg gur rnegu fjnyybj hf hc nyfb.

16:35 Naq gurer pnzr bhg n sver sebz gur YBEQ, naq pbafhzrq gur gjb
uhaqerq naq svsgl zra gung bssrerq vaprafr.

16:36 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 16:37 Fcrnx hagb Ryrnmne
gur fba bs Nneba gur cevrfg, gung ur gnxr hc gur prafref bhg bs gur
oheavat, naq fpnggre gubh gur sver lbaqre; sbe gurl ner unyybjrq.

16:38 Gur prafref bs gurfr fvaaref ntnvafg gurve bja fbhyf, yrg gurz
znxr gurz oebnq cyngrf sbe n pbirevat bs gur nygne: sbe gurl bssrerq
gurz orsber gur YBEQ, gurersber gurl ner unyybjrq: naq gurl funyy or n
fvta hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

16:39 Naq Ryrnmne gur cevrfg gbbx gur oenfra prafref, jurerjvgu gurl
gung jrer oheag unq bssrerq; naq gurl jrer znqr oebnq cyngrf sbe n
pbirevat bs gur nygne: 16:40 Gb or n zrzbevny hagb gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, gung ab fgenatre, juvpu vf abg bs gur frrq bs Nneba, pbzr arne
gb bssre vaprafr orsber gur YBEQ; gung ur or abg nf Xbenu, naq nf uvf
pbzcnal: nf gur YBEQ fnvq gb uvz ol gur unaq bs Zbfrf.

16:41 Ohg ba gur zbeebj nyy gur pbatertngvba bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry
zhezherq ntnvafg Zbfrf naq ntnvafg Nneba, fnlvat, Lr unir xvyyrq gur
crbcyr bs gur YBEQ.

16:42 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur pbatertngvba jnf tngurerq ntnvafg
Zbfrf naq ntnvafg Nneba, gung gurl ybbxrq gbjneq gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba: naq, orubyq, gur pybhq pbirerq vg, naq gur tybel bs gur
YBEQ nccrnerq.

16:43 Naq Zbfrf naq Nneba pnzr orsber gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba.

16:44 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 16:45 Trg lbh hc sebz
nzbat guvf pbatertngvba, gung V znl pbafhzr gurz nf va n zbzrag. Naq
gurl sryy hcba gurve snprf.

16:46 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb Nneba, Gnxr n prafre, naq chg sver gurerva
sebz bss gur nygne, naq chg ba vaprafr, naq tb dhvpxyl hagb gur
pbatertngvba, naq znxr na ngbarzrag sbe gurz: sbe gurer vf jengu tbar
bhg sebz gur YBEQ; gur cynthr vf ortha.

16:47 Naq Nneba gbbx nf Zbfrf pbzznaqrq, naq ena vagb gur zvqfg bs gur
pbatertngvba; naq, orubyq, gur cynthr jnf ortha nzbat gur crbcyr: naq
ur chg ba vaprafr, naq znqr na ngbarzrag sbe gur crbcyr.

16:48 Naq ur fgbbq orgjrra gur qrnq naq gur yvivat; naq gur cynthr jnf
fgnlrq.

16:49 Abj gurl gung qvrq va gur cynthr jrer sbhegrra gubhfnaq naq
frira uhaqerq, orfvqr gurz gung qvrq nobhg gur znggre bs Xbenu.

16:50 Naq Nneba erghearq hagb Zbfrf hagb gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs
gur pbatertngvba: naq gur cynthr jnf fgnlrq.

17:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 17:2 Fcrnx hagb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq gnxr bs rirel bar bs gurz n ebq nppbeqvat gb
gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, bs nyy gurve cevaprf nppbeqvat gb gur
ubhfr bs gurve snguref gjryir ebqf: jevgr gubh rirel zna'f anzr hcba
uvf ebq.

17:3 Naq gubh funyg jevgr Nneba'f anzr hcba gur ebq bs Yriv: sbe bar
ebq funyy or sbe gur urnq bs gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref.

17:4 Naq gubh funyg ynl gurz hc va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba
orsber gur grfgvzbal, jurer V jvyy zrrg jvgu lbh.

17:5 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, gung gur zna'f ebq, jubz V funyy
pubbfr, funyy oybffbz: naq V jvyy znxr gb prnfr sebz zr gur zhezhevatf
bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, jurerol gurl zhezhe ntnvafg lbh.

17:6 Naq Zbfrf fcnxr hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq rirel bar bs
gurve cevaprf tnir uvz n ebq ncvrpr, sbe rnpu cevapr bar, nppbeqvat gb
gurve snguref' ubhfrf, rira gjryir ebqf: naq gur ebq bs Nneba jnf
nzbat gurve ebqf.

17:7 Naq Zbfrf ynvq hc gur ebqf orsber gur YBEQ va gur gnoreanpyr bs
jvgarff.

17:8 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung ba gur zbeebj Zbfrf jrag vagb gur
gnoreanpyr bs jvgarff; naq, orubyq, gur ebq bs Nneba sbe gur ubhfr bs
Yriv jnf ohqqrq, naq oebhtug sbegu ohqf, naq oybbzrq oybffbzf, naq
lvryqrq nyzbaqf.

17:9 Naq Zbfrf oebhtug bhg nyy gur ebqf sebz orsber gur YBEQ hagb nyy
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry: naq gurl ybbxrq, naq gbbx rirel zna uvf ebq.

17:10 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Oevat Nneba'f ebq ntnva orsber gur
grfgvzbal, gb or xrcg sbe n gbxra ntnvafg gur eroryf; naq gubh funyg
dhvgr gnxr njnl gurve zhezhevatf sebz zr, gung gurl qvr abg.

17:11 Naq Zbfrf qvq fb: nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq uvz, fb qvq ur.

17:12 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, Orubyq, jr
qvr, jr crevfu, jr nyy crevfu.

17:13 Jubfbrire pbzrgu nal guvat arne hagb gur gnoreanpyr bs gur YBEQ
funyy qvr: funyy jr or pbafhzrq jvgu qlvat?  18:1 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq
hagb Nneba, Gubh naq gul fbaf naq gul sngure'f ubhfr jvgu gurr funyy
orne gur vavdhvgl bs gur fnapghnel: naq gubh naq gul fbaf jvgu gurr
funyy orne gur vavdhvgl bs lbhe cevrfgubbq.

18:2 Naq gul oerguera nyfb bs gur gevor bs Yriv, gur gevor bs gul
sngure, oevat gubh jvgu gurr, gung gurl znl or wbvarq hagb gurr, naq
zvavfgre hagb gurr: ohg gubh naq gul fbaf jvgu gurr funyy zvavfgre
orsber gur gnoreanpyr bs jvgarff.

18:3 Naq gurl funyy xrrc gul punetr, naq gur punetr bs nyy gur
gnoreanpyr: bayl gurl funyy abg pbzr avtu gur irffryf bs gur fnapghnel
naq gur nygne, gung arvgure gurl, abe lr nyfb, qvr.

18:4 Naq gurl funyy or wbvarq hagb gurr, naq xrrc gur punetr bs gur
gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, sbe nyy gur freivpr bs gur gnoreanpyr:
naq n fgenatre funyy abg pbzr avtu hagb lbh.

18:5 Naq lr funyy xrrc gur punetr bs gur fnapghnel, naq gur punetr bs
gur nygne: gung gurer or ab jengu nal zber hcba gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry.

18:6 Naq V, orubyq, V unir gnxra lbhe oerguera gur Yrivgrf sebz nzbat
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry: gb lbh gurl ner tvira nf n tvsg sbe gur YBEQ,
gb qb gur freivpr bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba.

18:7 Gurersber gubh naq gul fbaf jvgu gurr funyy xrrc lbhe cevrfg'f
bssvpr sbe rirelguvat bs gur nygne, naq jvguva gur invy; naq lr funyy
freir: V unir tvira lbhe cevrfg'f bssvpr hagb lbh nf n freivpr bs
tvsg: naq gur fgenatre gung pbzrgu avtu funyy or chg gb qrngu.

18:8 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Nneba, Orubyq, V nyfb unir tvira gurr gur
punetr bs zvar urnir bssrevatf bs nyy gur unyybjrq guvatf bs gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry; hagb gurr unir V tvira gurz ol ernfba bs gur
nabvagvat, naq gb gul fbaf, ol na beqvanapr sbe rire.

18:9 Guvf funyy or guvar bs gur zbfg ubyl guvatf, erfreirq sebz gur
sver: rirel boyngvba bs gurvef, rirel zrng bssrevat bs gurvef, naq
rirel fva bssrevat bs gurvef, naq rirel gerfcnff bssrevat bs gurvef
juvpu gurl funyy eraqre hagb zr, funyy or zbfg ubyl sbe gurr naq sbe
gul fbaf.

18:10 Va gur zbfg ubyl cynpr funyg gubh rng vg; rirel znyr funyy rng
vg: vg funyy or ubyl hagb gurr.

18:11 Naq guvf vf guvar; gur urnir bssrevat bs gurve tvsg, jvgu nyy
gur jnir bssrevatf bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry: V unir tvira gurz hagb
gurr, naq gb gul fbaf naq gb gul qnhtugref jvgu gurr, ol n fgnghgr sbe
rire: rirel bar gung vf pyrna va gul ubhfr funyy rng bs vg.

18:12 Nyy gur orfg bs gur bvy, naq nyy gur orfg bs gur jvar, naq bs
gur jurng, gur svefgsehvgf bs gurz juvpu gurl funyy bssre hagb gur
YBEQ, gurz unir V tvira gurr.

18:13 Naq jungfbrire vf svefg evcr va gur ynaq, juvpu gurl funyy oevat
hagb gur YBEQ, funyy or guvar; rirel bar gung vf pyrna va guvar ubhfr
funyy rng bs vg.

18:14 Rirel guvat qribgrq va Vfenry funyy or guvar.

18:15 Rirel guvat gung bcrargu gur zngevk va nyy syrfu, juvpu gurl
oevat hagb gur YBEQ, jurgure vg or bs zra be ornfgf, funyy or guvar:
arireguryrff gur svefgobea bs zna funyg gubh fheryl erqrrz, naq gur
svefgyvat bs hapyrna ornfgf funyg gubh erqrrz.

18:16 Naq gubfr gung ner gb or erqrrzrq sebz n zbagu byq funyg gubh
erqrrz, nppbeqvat gb guvar rfgvzngvba, sbe gur zbarl bs svir furxryf,
nsgre gur furxry bs gur fnapghnel, juvpu vf gjragl trenuf.

18:17 Ohg gur svefgyvat bs n pbj, be gur svefgyvat bs n furrc, be gur
svefgyvat bs n tbng, gubh funyg abg erqrrz; gurl ner ubyl: gubh funyg
fcevaxyr gurve oybbq hcba gur nygne, naq funyg ohea gurve sng sbe na
bssrevat znqr ol sver, sbe n fjrrg fnibhe hagb gur YBEQ.

18:18 Naq gur syrfu bs gurz funyy or guvar, nf gur jnir oernfg naq nf
gur evtug fubhyqre ner guvar.

18:19 Nyy gur urnir bssrevatf bs gur ubyl guvatf, juvpu gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry bssre hagb gur YBEQ, unir V tvira gurr, naq gul fbaf naq gul
qnhtugref jvgu gurr, ol n fgnghgr sbe rire: vg vf n pbiranag bs fnyg
sbe rire orsber gur YBEQ hagb gurr naq gb gul frrq jvgu gurr.

18:20 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Nneba, Gubh funyg unir ab vaurevgnapr va
gurve ynaq, arvgure funyg gubh unir nal cneg nzbat gurz: V nz gul cneg
naq guvar vaurevgnapr nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

18:21 Naq, orubyq, V unir tvira gur puvyqera bs Yriv nyy gur gragu va
Vfenry sbe na vaurevgnapr, sbe gurve freivpr juvpu gurl freir, rira
gur freivpr bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba.

18:22 Arvgure zhfg gur puvyqera bs Vfenry uraprsbegu pbzr avtu gur
gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, yrfg gurl orne fva, naq qvr.

18:23 Ohg gur Yrivgrf funyy qb gur freivpr bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba, naq gurl funyy orne gurve vavdhvgl: vg funyy or n
fgnghgr sbe rire guebhtubhg lbhe trarengvbaf, gung nzbat gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry gurl unir ab vaurevgnapr.

18:24 Ohg gur gvgurf bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, juvpu gurl bssre nf na
urnir bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ, V unir tvira gb gur Yrivgrf gb vaurevg:
gurersber V unir fnvq hagb gurz, Nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry gurl
funyy unir ab vaurevgnapr.

18:25 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 18:26 Guhf fcrnx hagb gur
Yrivgrf, naq fnl hagb gurz, Jura lr gnxr bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry gur
gvgurf juvpu V unir tvira lbh sebz gurz sbe lbhe vaurevgnapr, gura lr
funyy bssre hc na urnir bssrevat bs vg sbe gur YBEQ, rira n gragu cneg
bs gur gvgur.

18:27 Naq guvf lbhe urnir bssrevat funyy or erpxbarq hagb lbh, nf
gubhtu vg jrer gur pbea bs gur guerfuvatsybbe, naq nf gur shyarff bs
gur jvarcerff.

18:28 Guhf lr nyfb funyy bssre na urnir bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ bs nyy
lbhe gvgurf, juvpu lr erprvir bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry; naq lr funyy
tvir gurerbs gur YBEQ'f urnir bssrevat gb Nneba gur cevrfg.

18:29 Bhg bs nyy lbhe tvsgf lr funyy bssre rirel urnir bssrevat bs gur
YBEQ, bs nyy gur orfg gurerbs, rira gur unyybjrq cneg gurerbs bhg bs
vg.

18:30 Gurersber gubh funyg fnl hagb gurz, Jura lr unir urnirq gur orfg
gurerbs sebz vg, gura vg funyy or pbhagrq hagb gur Yrivgrf nf gur
vapernfr bs gur guerfuvatsybbe, naq nf gur vapernfr bs gur jvarcerff.

18:31 Naq lr funyy rng vg va rirel cynpr, lr naq lbhe ubhfrubyqf: sbe
vg vf lbhe erjneq sbe lbhe freivpr va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba.

18:32 Naq lr funyy orne ab fva ol ernfba bs vg, jura lr unir urnirq
sebz vg gur orfg bs vg: arvgure funyy lr cbyyhgr gur ubyl guvatf bs
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, yrfg lr qvr.

19:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf naq hagb Nneba, fnlvat, 19:2 Guvf
vf gur beqvanapr bs gur ynj juvpu gur YBEQ ungu pbzznaqrq, fnlvat,
Fcrnx hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, gung gurl oevat gurr n erq urvsre
jvgubhg fcbg, jurerva vf ab oyrzvfu, naq hcba juvpu arire pnzr lbxr:
19:3 Naq lr funyy tvir ure hagb Ryrnmne gur cevrfg, gung ur znl oevat
ure sbegu jvgubhg gur pnzc, naq bar funyy fynl ure orsber uvf snpr:
19:4 Naq Ryrnmne gur cevrfg funyy gnxr bs ure oybbq jvgu uvf svatre,
naq fcevaxyr bs ure oybbq qverpgyl orsber gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba frira gvzrf: 19:5 Naq bar funyy ohea gur urvsre va uvf
fvtug; ure fxva, naq ure syrfu, naq ure oybbq, jvgu ure qhat, funyy ur
ohea: 19:6 Naq gur cevrfg funyy gnxr prqne jbbq, naq ulffbc, naq
fpneyrg, naq pnfg vg vagb gur zvqfg bs gur oheavat bs gur urvsre.

19:7 Gura gur cevrfg funyy jnfu uvf pybgurf, naq ur funyy ongur uvf
syrfu va jngre, naq nsgrejneq ur funyy pbzr vagb gur pnzc, naq gur
cevrfg funyy or hapyrna hagvy gur rira.

19:8 Naq ur gung oheargu ure funyy jnfu uvf pybgurf va jngre, naq
ongur uvf syrfu va jngre, naq funyy or hapyrna hagvy gur rira.

19:9 Naq n zna gung vf pyrna funyy tngure hc gur nfurf bs gur urvsre,
naq ynl gurz hc jvgubhg gur pnzc va n pyrna cynpr, naq vg funyy or
xrcg sbe gur pbatertngvba bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry sbe n jngre bs
frcnengvba: vg vf n chevsvpngvba sbe fva.

19:10 Naq ur gung tngurergu gur nfurf bs gur urvsre funyy jnfu uvf
pybgurf, naq or hapyrna hagvy gur rira: naq vg funyy or hagb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq hagb gur fgenatre gung fbwbheargu nzbat gurz,
sbe n fgnghgr sbe rire.

19:11 Ur gung gbhpurgu gur qrnq obql bs nal zna funyy or hapyrna frira
qnlf.

19:12 Ur funyy chevsl uvzfrys jvgu vg ba gur guveq qnl, naq ba gur
friragu qnl ur funyy or pyrna: ohg vs ur chevsl abg uvzfrys gur guveq
qnl, gura gur friragu qnl ur funyy abg or pyrna.

19:13 Jubfbrire gbhpurgu gur qrnq obql bs nal zna gung vf qrnq, naq
chevsvrgu abg uvzfrys, qrsvyrgu gur gnoreanpyr bs gur YBEQ; naq gung
fbhy funyy or phg bss sebz Vfenry: orpnhfr gur jngre bs frcnengvba jnf
abg fcevaxyrq hcba uvz, ur funyy or hapyrna; uvf hapyrnaarff vf lrg
hcba uvz.

19:14 Guvf vf gur ynj, jura n zna qvrgu va n grag: nyy gung pbzr vagb
gur grag, naq nyy gung vf va gur grag, funyy or hapyrna frira qnlf.

19:15 Naq rirel bcra irffry, juvpu ungu ab pbirevat obhaq hcba vg, vf
hapyrna.

19:16 Naq jubfbrire gbhpurgu bar gung vf fynva jvgu n fjbeq va gur
bcra svryqf, be n qrnq obql, be n obar bs n zna, be n tenir, funyy or
hapyrna frira qnlf.

19:17 Naq sbe na hapyrna crefba gurl funyy gnxr bs gur nfurf bs gur
oheag urvsre bs chevsvpngvba sbe fva, naq ehaavat jngre funyy or chg
gurergb va n irffry: 19:18 Naq n pyrna crefba funyy gnxr ulffbc, naq
qvc vg va gur jngre, naq fcevaxyr vg hcba gur grag, naq hcba nyy gur
irffryf, naq hcba gur crefbaf gung jrer gurer, naq hcba uvz gung
gbhpurq n obar, be bar fynva, be bar qrnq, be n tenir: 19:19 Naq gur
pyrna crefba funyy fcevaxyr hcba gur hapyrna ba gur guveq qnl, naq ba
gur friragu qnl: naq ba gur friragu qnl ur funyy chevsl uvzfrys, naq
jnfu uvf pybgurf, naq ongur uvzfrys va jngre, naq funyy or pyrna ng
rira.

19:20 Ohg gur zna gung funyy or hapyrna, naq funyy abg chevsl uvzfrys,
gung fbhy funyy or phg bss sebz nzbat gur pbatertngvba, orpnhfr ur
ungu qrsvyrq gur fnapghnel bs gur YBEQ: gur jngre bs frcnengvba ungu
abg orra fcevaxyrq hcba uvz; ur vf hapyrna.

19:21 Naq vg funyy or n crecrghny fgnghgr hagb gurz, gung ur gung
fcevaxyrgu gur jngre bs frcnengvba funyy jnfu uvf pybgurf; naq ur gung
gbhpurgu gur jngre bs frcnengvba funyy or hapyrna hagvy rira.

19:22 Naq jungfbrire gur hapyrna crefba gbhpurgu funyy or hapyrna; naq
gur fbhy gung gbhpurgu vg funyy or hapyrna hagvy rira.

20:1 Gura pnzr gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, rira gur jubyr pbatertngvba,
vagb gur qrfreg bs Mva va gur svefg zbagu: naq gur crbcyr nobqr va
Xnqrfu; naq Zvevnz qvrq gurer, naq jnf ohevrq gurer.

20:2 Naq gurer jnf ab jngre sbe gur pbatertngvba: naq gurl tngurerq
gurzfryirf gbtrgure ntnvafg Zbfrf naq ntnvafg Nneba.

20:3 Naq gur crbcyr pubqr jvgu Zbfrf, naq fcnxr, fnlvat, Jbhyq Tbq
gung jr unq qvrq jura bhe oerguera qvrq orsber gur YBEQ!  20:4 Naq jul
unir lr oebhtug hc gur pbatertngvba bs gur YBEQ vagb guvf jvyqrearff,
gung jr naq bhe pnggyr fubhyq qvr gurer?  20:5 Naq jurersber unir lr
znqr hf gb pbzr hc bhg bs Rtlcg, gb oevat hf va hagb guvf rivy cynpr?
vg vf ab cynpr bs frrq, be bs svtf, be bs ivarf, be bs cbzrtenangrf;
arvgure vf gurer nal jngre gb qevax.

20:6 Naq Zbfrf naq Nneba jrag sebz gur cerfrapr bs gur nffrzoyl hagb
gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, naq gurl sryy hcba
gurve snprf: naq gur tybel bs gur YBEQ nccrnerq hagb gurz.

20:7 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 20:8 Gnxr gur ebq, naq
tngure gubh gur nffrzoyl gbtrgure, gubh, naq Nneba gul oebgure, naq
fcrnx lr hagb gur ebpx orsber gurve rlrf; naq vg funyy tvir sbegu uvf
jngre, naq gubh funyg oevat sbegu gb gurz jngre bhg bs gur ebpx: fb
gubh funyg tvir gur pbatertngvba naq gurve ornfgf qevax.

20:9 Naq Zbfrf gbbx gur ebq sebz orsber gur YBEQ, nf ur pbzznaqrq uvz.

20:10 Naq Zbfrf naq Nneba tngurerq gur pbatertngvba gbtrgure orsber
gur ebpx, naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Urne abj, lr eroryf; zhfg jr srgpu
lbh jngre bhg bs guvf ebpx?  20:11 Naq Zbfrf yvsgrq hc uvf unaq, naq
jvgu uvf ebq ur fzbgr gur ebpx gjvpr: naq gur jngre pnzr bhg
nohaqnagyl, naq gur pbatertngvba qenax, naq gurve ornfgf nyfb.

20:12 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf naq Nneba, Orpnhfr lr oryvrirq zr
abg, gb fnapgvsl zr va gur rlrf bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, gurersber
lr funyy abg oevat guvf pbatertngvba vagb gur ynaq juvpu V unir tvira
gurz.

20:13 Guvf vf gur jngre bs Zrevonu; orpnhfr gur puvyqera bs Vfenry
fgebir jvgu gur YBEQ, naq ur jnf fnapgvsvrq va gurz.

20:14 Naq Zbfrf frag zrffratref sebz Xnqrfu hagb gur xvat bs Rqbz,
Guhf fnvgu gul oebgure Vfenry, Gubh xabjrfg nyy gur geninvy gung ungu
orsnyyra hf: 20:15 Ubj bhe snguref jrag qbja vagb Rtlcg, naq jr unir
qjryg va Rtlcg n ybat gvzr; naq gur Rtlcgvnaf irkrq hf, naq bhe
snguref: 20:16 Naq jura jr pevrq hagb gur YBEQ, ur urneq bhe ibvpr,
naq frag na natry, naq ungu oebhtug hf sbegu bhg bs Rtlcg: naq,
orubyq, jr ner va Xnqrfu, n pvgl va gur hggrezbfg bs gul obeqre: 20:17
Yrg hf cnff, V cenl gurr, guebhtu gul pbhagel: jr jvyy abg cnff
guebhtu gur svryqf, be guebhtu gur ivarlneqf, arvgure jvyy jr qevax bs
gur jngre bs gur jryyf: jr jvyy tb ol gur xvat'f uvtu jnl, jr jvyy abg
ghea gb gur evtug unaq abe gb gur yrsg, hagvy jr unir cnffrq gul
obeqref.

20:18 Naq Rqbz fnvq hagb uvz, Gubh funyg abg cnff ol zr, yrfg V pbzr
bhg ntnvafg gurr jvgu gur fjbeq.

20:19 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry fnvq hagb uvz, Jr jvyy tb ol gur uvtu
jnl: naq vs V naq zl pnggyr qevax bs gul jngre, gura V jvyy cnl sbe
vg: V jvyy bayl, jvgubhg qbvat nalguvat ryfr, tb guebhtu ba zl srrg.

20:20 Naq ur fnvq, Gubh funyg abg tb guebhtu. Naq Rqbz pnzr bhg
ntnvafg uvz jvgu zhpu crbcyr, naq jvgu n fgebat unaq.

20:21 Guhf Rqbz ershfrq gb tvir Vfenry cnffntr guebhtu uvf obeqre:
jurersber Vfenry ghearq njnl sebz uvz.

20:22 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, rira gur jubyr pbatertngvba,
wbhearlrq sebz Xnqrfu, naq pnzr hagb zbhag Ube.

20:23 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf naq Nneba va zbhag Ube, ol gur
pbnfg bs gur ynaq bs Rqbz, fnlvat, 20:24 Nneba funyy or tngurerq hagb
uvf crbcyr: sbe ur funyy abg ragre vagb gur ynaq juvpu V unir tvira
hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, orpnhfr lr eroryyrq ntnvafg zl jbeq ng
gur jngre bs Zrevonu.

20:25 Gnxr Nneba naq Ryrnmne uvf fba, naq oevat gurz hc hagb zbhag
Ube: 20:26 Naq fgevc Nneba bs uvf tnezragf, naq chg gurz hcba Ryrnmne
uvf fba: naq Nneba funyy or tngurerq hagb uvf crbcyr, naq funyy qvr
gurer.

20:27 Naq Zbfrf qvq nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq: naq gurl jrag hc vagb zbhag
Ube va gur fvtug bs nyy gur pbatertngvba.

20:28 Naq Zbfrf fgevccrq Nneba bs uvf tnezragf, naq chg gurz hcba
Ryrnmne uvf fba; naq Nneba qvrq gurer va gur gbc bs gur zbhag: naq
Zbfrf naq Ryrnmne pnzr qbja sebz gur zbhag.

20:29 Naq jura nyy gur pbatertngvba fnj gung Nneba jnf qrnq, gurl
zbhearq sbe Nneba guvegl qnlf, rira nyy gur ubhfr bs Vfenry.

21:1 Naq jura xvat Nenq gur Pnannavgr, juvpu qjryg va gur fbhgu, urneq
gryy gung Vfenry pnzr ol gur jnl bs gur fcvrf; gura ur sbhtug ntnvafg
Vfenry, naq gbbx fbzr bs gurz cevfbaref.

21:2 Naq Vfenry ibjrq n ibj hagb gur YBEQ, naq fnvq, Vs gubh jvyg
vaqrrq qryvire guvf crbcyr vagb zl unaq, gura V jvyy hggreyl qrfgebl
gurve pvgvrf.

21:3 Naq gur YBEQ urnexrarq gb gur ibvpr bs Vfenry, naq qryvirerq hc
gur Pnannavgrf; naq gurl hggreyl qrfgeblrq gurz naq gurve pvgvrf: naq
ur pnyyrq gur anzr bs gur cynpr Ubeznu.

21:4 Naq gurl wbhearlrq sebz zbhag Ube ol gur jnl bs gur Erq frn, gb
pbzcnff gur ynaq bs Rqbz: naq gur fbhy bs gur crbcyr jnf zhpu
qvfpbhentrq orpnhfr bs gur jnl.

21:5 Naq gur crbcyr fcnxr ntnvafg Tbq, naq ntnvafg Zbfrf, Jurersber
unir lr oebhtug hf hc bhg bs Rtlcg gb qvr va gur jvyqrearff? sbe gurer
vf ab oernq, arvgure vf gurer nal jngre; naq bhe fbhy ybngurgu guvf
yvtug oernq.

21:6 Naq gur YBEQ frag svrel frecragf nzbat gur crbcyr, naq gurl ovg
gur crbcyr; naq zhpu crbcyr bs Vfenry qvrq.

21:7 Gurersber gur crbcyr pnzr gb Zbfrf, naq fnvq, Jr unir fvaarq, sbe
jr unir fcbxra ntnvafg gur YBEQ, naq ntnvafg gurr; cenl hagb gur YBEQ,
gung ur gnxr njnl gur frecragf sebz hf. Naq Zbfrf cenlrq sbe gur
crbcyr.

21:8 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Znxr gurr n svrel frecrag, naq frg
vg hcba n cbyr: naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, gung rirel bar gung vf
ovggra, jura ur ybbxrgu hcba vg, funyy yvir.

21:9 Naq Zbfrf znqr n frecrag bs oenff, naq chg vg hcba n cbyr, naq vg
pnzr gb cnff, gung vs n frecrag unq ovggra nal zna, jura ur oruryq gur
frecrag bs oenff, ur yvirq.

21:10 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry frg sbejneq, naq cvgpurq va Bobgu.

21:11 Naq gurl wbhearlrq sebz Bobgu, naq cvgpurq ng Vwrnonevz, va gur
jvyqrearff juvpu vf orsber Zbno, gbjneq gur fhaevfvat.

21:12 Sebz gurapr gurl erzbirq, naq cvgpurq va gur inyyrl bs Mnerq.

21:13 Sebz gurapr gurl erzbirq, naq cvgpurq ba gur bgure fvqr bs
Neaba, juvpu vf va gur jvyqrearff gung pbzrgu bhg bs gur pbnfgf bs gur
Nzbevgrf: sbe Neaba vf gur obeqre bs Zbno, orgjrra Zbno naq gur
Nzbevgrf.

21:14 Jurersber vg vf fnvq va gur obbx bs gur jnef bs gur YBEQ, Jung
ur qvq va gur Erq frn, naq va gur oebbxf bs Neaba, 21:15 Naq ng gur
fgernz bs gur oebbxf gung tbrgu qbja gb gur qjryyvat bs Ne, naq yvrgu
hcba gur obeqre bs Zbno.

21:16 Naq sebz gurapr gurl jrag gb Orre: gung vf gur jryy jurerbs gur
YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, Tngure gur crbcyr gbtrgure, naq V jvyy tvir
gurz jngre.

21:17 Gura Vfenry fnat guvf fbat, Fcevat hc, B jryy; fvat lr hagb vg:
21:18 Gur cevaprf qvttrq gur jryy, gur aboyrf bs gur crbcyr qvttrq vg,
ol gur qverpgvba bs gur ynjtvire, jvgu gurve fgnirf. Naq sebz gur
jvyqrearff gurl jrag gb Znggnanu: 21:19 Naq sebz Znggnanu gb Anunyvry:
naq sebz Anunyvry gb Onzbgu: 21:20 Naq sebz Onzbgu va gur inyyrl, gung
vf va gur pbhagel bs Zbno, gb gur gbc bs Cvftnu, juvpu ybbxrgu gbjneq
Wrfuvzba.

21:21 Naq Vfenry frag zrffratref hagb Fvuba xvat bs gur Nzbevgrf,
fnlvat, 21:22 Yrg zr cnff guebhtu gul ynaq: jr jvyy abg ghea vagb gur
svryqf, be vagb gur ivarlneqf; jr jvyy abg qevax bs gur jngref bs gur
jryy: ohg jr jvyy tb nybat ol gur xvat'f uvtu jnl, hagvy jr or cnfg
gul obeqref.

21:23 Naq Fvuba jbhyq abg fhssre Vfenry gb cnff guebhtu uvf obeqre:
ohg Fvuba tngurerq nyy uvf crbcyr gbtrgure, naq jrag bhg ntnvafg
Vfenry vagb gur jvyqrearff: naq ur pnzr gb Wnunm, naq sbhtug ntnvafg
Vfenry.

21:24 Naq Vfenry fzbgr uvz jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq, naq cbffrffrq
uvf ynaq sebz Neaba hagb Wnoobx, rira hagb gur puvyqera bs Nzzba: sbe
gur obeqre bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba jnf fgebat.

21:25 Naq Vfenry gbbx nyy gurfr pvgvrf: naq Vfenry qjryg va nyy gur
pvgvrf bs gur Nzbevgrf, va Urfuoba, naq va nyy gur ivyyntrf gurerbs.

21:26 Sbe Urfuoba jnf gur pvgl bs Fvuba gur xvat bs gur Nzbevgrf, jub
unq sbhtug ntnvafg gur sbezre xvat bs Zbno, naq gnxra nyy uvf ynaq bhg
bs uvf unaq, rira hagb Neaba.

21:27 Jurersber gurl gung fcrnx va cebireof fnl, Pbzr vagb Urfuoba,
yrg gur pvgl bs Fvuba or ohvyg naq cercnerq: 21:28 Sbe gurer vf n sver
tbar bhg bs Urfuoba, n synzr sebz gur pvgl bs Fvuba: vg ungu pbafhzrq
Ne bs Zbno, naq gur ybeqf bs gur uvtu cynprf bs Neaba.

21:29 Jbr gb gurr, Zbno! gubh neg haqbar, B crbcyr bs Purzbfu: ur ungu
tvira uvf fbaf gung rfpncrq, naq uvf qnhtugref, vagb pncgvivgl hagb
Fvuba xvat bs gur Nzbevgrf.

21:30 Jr unir fubg ng gurz; Urfuoba vf crevfurq rira hagb Qvoba, naq
jr unir ynvq gurz jnfgr rira hagb Abcunu, juvpu ernpurgu hagb Zrqron.

21:31 Guhf Vfenry qjryg va gur ynaq bs gur Nzbevgrf.

21:32 Naq Zbfrf frag gb fcl bhg Wnnmre, naq gurl gbbx gur ivyyntrf
gurerbs, naq qebir bhg gur Nzbevgrf gung jrer gurer.

21:33 Naq gurl ghearq naq jrag hc ol gur jnl bs Onfuna: naq Bt gur
xvat bs Onfuna jrag bhg ntnvafg gurz, ur, naq nyy uvf crbcyr, gb gur
onggyr ng Rqerv.

21:34 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Srne uvz abg: sbe V unir qryvirerq
uvz vagb gul unaq, naq nyy uvf crbcyr, naq uvf ynaq; naq gubh funyg qb
gb uvz nf gubh qvqfg hagb Fvuba xvat bs gur Nzbevgrf, juvpu qjryg ng
Urfuoba.

21:35 Fb gurl fzbgr uvz, naq uvf fbaf, naq nyy uvf crbcyr, hagvy gurer
jnf abar yrsg uvz nyvir: naq gurl cbffrffrq uvf ynaq.

22:1 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry frg sbejneq, naq cvgpurq va gur cynvaf
bs Zbno ba guvf fvqr Wbeqna ol Wrevpub.

22:2 Naq Onynx gur fba bs Mvccbe fnj nyy gung Vfenry unq qbar gb gur
Nzbevgrf.

22:3 Naq Zbno jnf fber nsenvq bs gur crbcyr, orpnhfr gurl jrer znal:
naq Zbno jnf qvfgerffrq orpnhfr bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

22:4 Naq Zbno fnvq hagb gur ryqref bs Zvqvna, Abj funyy guvf pbzcnal
yvpx hc nyy gung ner ebhaq nobhg hf, nf gur bk yvpxrgu hc gur tenff bs
gur svryq.

Naq Onynx gur fba bs Mvccbe jnf xvat bs gur Zbnovgrf ng gung gvzr.

22:5 Ur frag zrffratref gurersber hagb Onynnz gur fba bs Orbe gb
Crgube, juvpu vf ol gur evire bs gur ynaq bs gur puvyqera bs uvf
crbcyr, gb pnyy uvz, fnlvat, Orubyq, gurer vf n crbcyr pbzr bhg sebz
Rtlcg: orubyq, gurl pbire gur snpr bs gur rnegu, naq gurl novqr bire
ntnvafg zr: 22:6 Pbzr abj gurersber, V cenl gurr, phefr zr guvf
crbcyr; sbe gurl ner gbb zvtugl sbe zr: crenqiragher V funyy cerinvy,
gung jr znl fzvgr gurz, naq gung V znl qevir gurz bhg bs gur ynaq: sbe
V jbg gung ur jubz gubh oyrffrfg vf oyrffrq, naq ur jubz gubh phefrfg
vf phefrq.

22:7 Naq gur ryqref bs Zbno naq gur ryqref bs Zvqvna qrcnegrq jvgu gur
erjneqf bs qvivangvba va gurve unaq; naq gurl pnzr hagb Onynnz, naq
fcnxr hagb uvz gur jbeqf bs Onynx.

22:8 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Ybqtr urer guvf avtug, naq V jvyy oevat
lbh jbeq ntnva, nf gur YBEQ funyy fcrnx hagb zr: naq gur cevaprf bs
Zbno nobqr jvgu Onynnz.

22:9 Naq Tbq pnzr hagb Onynnz, naq fnvq, Jung zra ner gurfr jvgu gurr?
22:10 Naq Onynnz fnvq hagb Tbq, Onynx gur fba bs Mvccbe, xvat bs Zbno,
ungu frag hagb zr, fnlvat, 22:11 Orubyq, gurer vf n crbcyr pbzr bhg bs
Rtlcg, juvpu pbirergu gur snpr bs gur rnegu: pbzr abj, phefr zr gurz;
crenqiragher V funyy or noyr gb birepbzr gurz, naq qevir gurz bhg.

22:12 Naq Tbq fnvq hagb Onynnz, Gubh funyg abg tb jvgu gurz; gubh
funyg abg phefr gur crbcyr: sbe gurl ner oyrffrq.

22:13 Naq Onynnz ebfr hc va gur zbeavat, naq fnvq hagb gur cevaprf bs
Onynx, Trg lbh vagb lbhe ynaq: sbe gur YBEQ ershfrgu gb tvir zr yrnir
gb tb jvgu lbh.

22:14 Naq gur cevaprf bs Zbno ebfr hc, naq gurl jrag hagb Onynx, naq
fnvq, Onynnz ershfrgu gb pbzr jvgu hf.

22:15 Naq Onynx frag lrg ntnva cevaprf, zber, naq zber ubabhenoyr guna
gurl.

22:16 Naq gurl pnzr gb Onynnz, naq fnvq gb uvz, Guhf fnvgu Onynx gur
fba bs Mvccbe, Yrg abguvat, V cenl gurr, uvaqre gurr sebz pbzvat hagb
zr: 22:17 Sbe V jvyy cebzbgr gurr hagb irel terng ubabhe, naq V jvyy
qb jungfbrire gubh fnlrfg hagb zr: pbzr gurersber, V cenl gurr, phefr
zr guvf crbcyr.

22:18 Naq Onynnz nafjrerq naq fnvq hagb gur freinagf bs Onynx, Vs
Onynx jbhyq tvir zr uvf ubhfr shyy bs fvyire naq tbyq, V pnaabg tb
orlbaq gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ zl Tbq, gb qb yrff be zber.

22:19 Abj gurersber, V cenl lbh, gneel lr nyfb urer guvf avtug, gung V
znl xabj jung gur YBEQ jvyy fnl hagb zr zber.

22:20 Naq Tbq pnzr hagb Onynnz ng avtug, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Vs gur zra
pbzr gb pnyy gurr, evfr hc, naq tb jvgu gurz; ohg lrg gur jbeq juvpu V
funyy fnl hagb gurr, gung funyg gubh qb.

22:21 Naq Onynnz ebfr hc va gur zbeavat, naq fnqqyrq uvf nff, naq jrag
jvgu gur cevaprf bs Zbno.

22:22 Naq Tbq'f natre jnf xvaqyrq orpnhfr ur jrag: naq gur natry bs
gur YBEQ fgbbq va gur jnl sbe na nqirefnel ntnvafg uvz. Abj ur jnf
evqvat hcba uvf nff, naq uvf gjb freinagf jrer jvgu uvz.

22:23 Naq gur nff fnj gur natry bs gur YBEQ fgnaqvat va gur jnl, naq
uvf fjbeq qenja va uvf unaq: naq gur nff ghearq nfvqr bhg bs gur jnl,
naq jrag vagb gur svryq: naq Onynnz fzbgr gur nff, gb ghea ure vagb
gur jnl.

22:24 Ohg gur natry bs gur YBEQ fgbbq va n cngu bs gur ivarlneqf, n
jnyy orvat ba guvf fvqr, naq n jnyy ba gung fvqr.

22:25 Naq jura gur nff fnj gur natry bs gur YBEQ, fur guehfg urefrys
hagb gur jnyy, naq pehfurq Onynnz'f sbbg ntnvafg gur jnyy: naq ur
fzbgr ure ntnva.

22:26 Naq gur natry bs gur YBEQ jrag shegure, naq fgbbq va n aneebj
cynpr, jurer jnf ab jnl gb ghea rvgure gb gur evtug unaq be gb gur
yrsg.

22:27 Naq jura gur nff fnj gur natry bs gur YBEQ, fur sryy qbja haqre
Onynnz: naq Onynnz'f natre jnf xvaqyrq, naq ur fzbgr gur nff jvgu n
fgnss.

22:28 Naq gur YBEQ bcrarq gur zbhgu bs gur nff, naq fur fnvq hagb
Onynnz, Jung unir V qbar hagb gurr, gung gubh unfg fzvggra zr gurfr
guerr gvzrf?  22:29 Naq Onynnz fnvq hagb gur nff, Orpnhfr gubh unfg
zbpxrq zr: V jbhyq gurer jrer n fjbeq va zvar unaq, sbe abj jbhyq V
xvyy gurr.

22:30 Naq gur nff fnvq hagb Onynnz, Nz abg V guvar nff, hcba juvpu
gubh unfg evqqra rire fvapr V jnf guvar hagb guvf qnl? jnf V rire jbag
gb qb fb hagb gurr? Naq ur fnvq, Anl.

22:31 Gura gur YBEQ bcrarq gur rlrf bs Onynnz, naq ur fnj gur natry bs
gur YBEQ fgnaqvat va gur jnl, naq uvf fjbeq qenja va uvf unaq: naq ur
objrq qbja uvf urnq, naq sryy syng ba uvf snpr.

22:32 Naq gur natry bs gur YBEQ fnvq hagb uvz, Jurersber unfg gubh
fzvggra guvar nff gurfr guerr gvzrf? orubyq, V jrag bhg gb jvgufgnaq
gurr, orpnhfr gul jnl vf creirefr orsber zr: 22:33 Naq gur nff fnj zr,
naq ghearq sebz zr gurfr guerr gvzrf: hayrff fur unq ghearq sebz zr,
fheryl abj nyfb V unq fynva gurr, naq fnirq ure nyvir.

22:34 Naq Onynnz fnvq hagb gur natry bs gur YBEQ, V unir fvaarq; sbe V
xarj abg gung gubh fgbbqrfg va gur jnl ntnvafg zr: abj gurersber, vs
vg qvfcyrnfr gurr, V jvyy trg zr onpx ntnva.

22:35 Naq gur natry bs gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Onynnz, Tb jvgu gur zra: ohg
bayl gur jbeq gung V funyy fcrnx hagb gurr, gung gubh funyg fcrnx. Fb
Onynnz jrag jvgu gur cevaprf bs Onynx.

22:36 Naq jura Onynx urneq gung Onynnz jnf pbzr, ur jrag bhg gb zrrg
uvz hagb n pvgl bs Zbno, juvpu vf va gur obeqre bs Neaba, juvpu vf va
gur hgzbfg pbnfg.

22:37 Naq Onynx fnvq hagb Onynnz, Qvq V abg rnearfgyl fraq hagb gurr
gb pnyy gurr? jurersber pnzrfg gubh abg hagb zr? nz V abg noyr vaqrrq
gb cebzbgr gurr gb ubabhe?  22:38 Naq Onynnz fnvq hagb Onynx, Yb, V nz
pbzr hagb gurr: unir V abj nal cbjre ng nyy gb fnl nal guvat? gur jbeq
gung Tbq chggrgu va zl zbhgu, gung funyy V fcrnx.

22:39 Naq Onynnz jrag jvgu Onynx, naq gurl pnzr hagb Xvewnguuhmbgu.

22:40 Naq Onynx bssrerq bkra naq furrc, naq frag gb Onynnz, naq gb gur
cevaprf gung jrer jvgu uvz.

22:41 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ba gur zbeebj, gung Onynx gbbx Onynnz, naq
oebhtug uvz hc vagb gur uvtu cynprf bs Onny, gung gurapr ur zvtug frr
gur hgzbfg cneg bs gur crbcyr.

23:1 Naq Onynnz fnvq hagb Onynx, Ohvyq zr urer frira nygnef, naq
cercner zr urer frira bkra naq frira enzf.

23:2 Naq Onynx qvq nf Onynnz unq fcbxra; naq Onynx naq Onynnz bssrerq
ba rirel nygne n ohyybpx naq n enz.

23:3 Naq Onynnz fnvq hagb Onynx, Fgnaq ol gul oheag bssrevat, naq V
jvyy tb: crenqiragher gur YBEQ jvyy pbzr gb zrrg zr: naq jungfbrire ur
furjrgu zr V jvyy gryy gurr. Naq ur jrag gb na uvtu cynpr.

23:4 Naq Tbq zrg Onynnz: naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, V unir cercnerq frira
nygnef, naq V unir bssrerq hcba rirel nygne n ohyybpx naq n enz.

23:5 Naq gur YBEQ chg n jbeq va Onynnz'f zbhgu, naq fnvq, Erghea hagb
Onynx, naq guhf gubh funyg fcrnx.

23:6 Naq ur erghearq hagb uvz, naq, yb, ur fgbbq ol uvf oheag
fnpevsvpr, ur, naq nyy gur cevaprf bs Zbno.

23:7 Naq ur gbbx hc uvf cnenoyr, naq fnvq, Onynx gur xvat bs Zbno ungu
oebhtug zr sebz Nenz, bhg bs gur zbhagnvaf bs gur rnfg, fnlvat, Pbzr,
phefr zr Wnpbo, naq pbzr, qrsl Vfenry.

23:8 Ubj funyy V phefr, jubz Tbq ungu abg phefrq? be ubj funyy V qrsl,
jubz gur YBEQ ungu abg qrsvrq?  23:9 Sbe sebz gur gbc bs gur ebpxf V
frr uvz, naq sebz gur uvyyf V orubyq uvz: yb, gur crbcyr funyy qjryy
nybar, naq funyy abg or erpxbarq nzbat gur angvbaf.

23:10 Jub pna pbhag gur qhfg bs Wnpbo, naq gur ahzore bs gur sbhegu
cneg bs Vfenry? Yrg zr qvr gur qrngu bs gur evtugrbhf, naq yrg zl ynfg
raq or yvxr uvf!  23:11 Naq Onynx fnvq hagb Onynnz, Jung unfg gubh
qbar hagb zr? V gbbx gurr gb phefr zvar rarzvrf, naq, orubyq, gubh
unfg oyrffrq gurz nygbtrgure.

23:12 Naq ur nafjrerq naq fnvq, Zhfg V abg gnxr urrq gb fcrnx gung
juvpu gur YBEQ ungu chg va zl zbhgu?  23:13 Naq Onynx fnvq hagb uvz,
Pbzr, V cenl gurr, jvgu zr hagb nabgure cynpr, sebz jurapr gubh znlrfg
frr gurz: gubh funyg frr ohg gur hgzbfg cneg bs gurz, naq funyg abg
frr gurz nyy: naq phefr zr gurz sebz gurapr.

23:14 Naq ur oebhtug uvz vagb gur svryq bs Mbcuvz, gb gur gbc bs
Cvftnu, naq ohvyg frira nygnef, naq bssrerq n ohyybpx naq n enz ba
rirel nygne.

23:15 Naq ur fnvq hagb Onynx, Fgnaq urer ol gul oheag bssrevat, juvyr
V zrrg gur YBEQ lbaqre.

23:16 Naq gur YBEQ zrg Onynnz, naq chg n jbeq va uvf zbhgu, naq fnvq,
Tb ntnva hagb Onynx, naq fnl guhf.

23:17 Naq jura ur pnzr gb uvz, orubyq, ur fgbbq ol uvf oheag bssrevat,
naq gur cevaprf bs Zbno jvgu uvz. Naq Onynx fnvq hagb uvz, Jung ungu
gur YBEQ fcbxra?  23:18 Naq ur gbbx hc uvf cnenoyr, naq fnvq, Evfr hc,
Onynx, naq urne; urnexra hagb zr, gubh fba bs Mvccbe: 23:19 Tbq vf abg
n zna, gung ur fubhyq yvr; arvgure gur fba bs zna, gung ur fubhyq
ercrag: ungu ur fnvq, naq funyy ur abg qb vg? be ungu ur fcbxra, naq
funyy ur abg znxr vg tbbq?  23:20 Orubyq, V unir erprvirq pbzznaqzrag
gb oyrff: naq ur ungu oyrffrq; naq V pnaabg erirefr vg.

23:21 Ur ungu abg oruryq vavdhvgl va Wnpbo, arvgure ungu ur frra
creirefrarff va Vfenry: gur YBEQ uvf Tbq vf jvgu uvz, naq gur fubhg bs
n xvat vf nzbat gurz.

23:22 Tbq oebhtug gurz bhg bs Rtlcg; ur ungu nf vg jrer gur fgeratgu
bs na havpbea.

23:23 Fheryl gurer vf ab rapunagzrag ntnvafg Wnpbo, arvgure vf gurer
nal qvivangvba ntnvafg Vfenry: nppbeqvat gb guvf gvzr vg funyy or fnvq
bs Wnpbo naq bs Vfenry, Jung ungu Tbq jebhtug!  23:24 Orubyq, gur
crbcyr funyy evfr hc nf n terng yvba, naq yvsg hc uvzfrys nf n lbhat
yvba: ur funyy abg yvr qbja hagvy ur rng bs gur cerl, naq qevax gur
oybbq bs gur fynva.

23:25 Naq Onynx fnvq hagb Onynnz, Arvgure phefr gurz ng nyy, abe oyrff
gurz ng nyy.

23:26 Ohg Onynnz nafjrerq naq fnvq hagb Onynx, Gbyq abg V gurr,
fnlvat, Nyy gung gur YBEQ fcrnxrgu, gung V zhfg qb?  23:27 Naq Onynx
fnvq hagb Onynnz, Pbzr, V cenl gurr, V jvyy oevat gurr hagb nabgure
cynpr; crenqiragher vg jvyy cyrnfr Tbq gung gubh znlrfg phefr zr gurz
sebz gurapr.

23:28 Naq Onynx oebhtug Onynnz hagb gur gbc bs Crbe, gung ybbxrgu
gbjneq Wrfuvzba.

23:29 Naq Onynnz fnvq hagb Onynx, Ohvyq zr urer frira nygnef, naq
cercner zr urer frira ohyybpxf naq frira enzf.

23:30 Naq Onynx qvq nf Onynnz unq fnvq, naq bssrerq n ohyybpx naq n
enz ba rirel nygne.

24:1 Naq jura Onynnz fnj gung vg cyrnfrq gur YBEQ gb oyrff Vfenry, ur
jrag abg, nf ng bgure gvzrf, gb frrx sbe rapunagzragf, ohg ur frg uvf
snpr gbjneq gur jvyqrearff.

24:2 Naq Onynnz yvsgrq hc uvf rlrf, naq ur fnj Vfenry novqvat va uvf
gragf nppbeqvat gb gurve gevorf; naq gur fcvevg bs Tbq pnzr hcba uvz.

24:3 Naq ur gbbx hc uvf cnenoyr, naq fnvq, Onynnz gur fba bs Orbe ungu
fnvq, naq gur zna jubfr rlrf ner bcra ungu fnvq: 24:4 Ur ungu fnvq,
juvpu urneq gur jbeqf bs Tbq, juvpu fnj gur ivfvba bs gur Nyzvtugl,
snyyvat vagb n genapr, ohg univat uvf rlrf bcra: 24:5 Ubj tbbqyl ner
gul gragf, B Wnpbo, naq gul gnoreanpyrf, B Vfenry!  24:6 Nf gur
inyyrlf ner gurl fcernq sbegu, nf tneqraf ol gur evire'f fvqr, nf gur
gerrf bs yvta nybrf juvpu gur YBEQ ungu cynagrq, naq nf prqne gerrf
orfvqr gur jngref.

24:7 Ur funyy cbhe gur jngre bhg bs uvf ohpxrgf, naq uvf frrq funyy or
va znal jngref, naq uvf xvat funyy or uvture guna Ntnt, naq uvf
xvatqbz funyy or rknygrq.

24:8 Tbq oebhtug uvz sbegu bhg bs Rtlcg; ur ungu nf vg jrer gur
fgeratgu bs na havpbea: ur funyy rng hc gur angvbaf uvf rarzvrf, naq
funyy oernx gurve obarf, naq cvrepr gurz guebhtu jvgu uvf neebjf.

24:9 Ur pbhpurq, ur ynl qbja nf n yvba, naq nf n terng yvba: jub funyy
fgve uvz hc? Oyrffrq vf ur gung oyrffrgu gurr, naq phefrq vf ur gung
phefrgu gurr.

24:10 Naq Onynx'f natre jnf xvaqyrq ntnvafg Onynnz, naq ur fzbgr uvf
unaqf gbtrgure: naq Onynx fnvq hagb Onynnz, V pnyyrq gurr gb phefr
zvar rarzvrf, naq, orubyq, gubh unfg nygbtrgure oyrffrq gurz gurfr
guerr gvzrf.

24:11 Gurersber abj syrr gubh gb gul cynpr: V gubhtug gb cebzbgr gurr
hagb terng ubabhe; ohg, yb, gur YBEQ ungu xrcg gurr onpx sebz ubabhe.

24:12 Naq Onynnz fnvq hagb Onynx, Fcnxr V abg nyfb gb gul zrffratref
juvpu gubh fragrfg hagb zr, fnlvat, 24:13 Vs Onynx jbhyq tvir zr uvf
ubhfr shyy bs fvyire naq tbyq, V pnaabg tb orlbaq gur pbzznaqzrag bs
gur YBEQ, gb qb rvgure tbbq be onq bs zvar bja zvaq; ohg jung gur YBEQ
fnvgu, gung jvyy V fcrnx?  24:14 Naq abj, orubyq, V tb hagb zl crbcyr:
pbzr gurersber, naq V jvyy nqiregvfr gurr jung guvf crbcyr funyy qb gb
gul crbcyr va gur ynggre qnlf.

24:15 Naq ur gbbx hc uvf cnenoyr, naq fnvq, Onynnz gur fba bs Orbe
ungu fnvq, naq gur zna jubfr rlrf ner bcra ungu fnvq: 24:16 Ur ungu
fnvq, juvpu urneq gur jbeqf bs Tbq, naq xarj gur xabjyrqtr bs gur zbfg
Uvtu, juvpu fnj gur ivfvba bs gur Nyzvtugl, snyyvat vagb n genapr, ohg
univat uvf rlrf bcra: 24:17 V funyy frr uvz, ohg abg abj: V funyy
orubyq uvz, ohg abg avtu: gurer funyy pbzr n Fgne bhg bs Wnpbo, naq n
Fprcger funyy evfr bhg bs Vfenry, naq funyy fzvgr gur pbearef bs Zbno,
naq qrfgebl nyy gur puvyqera bs Furgu.

24:18 Naq Rqbz funyy or n cbffrffvba, Frve nyfb funyy or n cbffrffvba
sbe uvf rarzvrf; naq Vfenry funyy qb inyvnagyl.

24:19 Bhg bs Wnpbo funyy pbzr ur gung funyy unir qbzvavba, naq funyy
qrfgebl uvz gung erznvargu bs gur pvgl.

24:20 Naq jura ur ybbxrq ba Nznyrx, ur gbbx hc uvf cnenoyr, naq fnvq,
Nznyrx jnf gur svefg bs gur angvbaf; ohg uvf ynggre raq funyy or gung
ur crevfu sbe rire.

24:21 Naq ur ybbxrq ba gur Xravgrf, naq gbbx hc uvf cnenoyr, naq fnvq,
Fgebat vf gul qjryyvatcynpr, naq gubh chggrfg gul arfg va n ebpx.

24:22 Arireguryrff gur Xravgr funyy or jnfgrq, hagvy Nffuhe funyy
pneel gurr njnl pncgvir.

24:23 Naq ur gbbx hc uvf cnenoyr, naq fnvq, Nynf, jub funyy yvir jura
Tbq qbrgu guvf!  24:24 Naq fuvcf funyy pbzr sebz gur pbnfg bs Puvggvz,
naq funyy nssyvpg Nffuhe, naq funyy nssyvpg Rore, naq ur nyfb funyy
crevfu sbe rire.

24:25 Naq Onynnz ebfr hc, naq jrag naq erghearq gb uvf cynpr: naq
Onynx nyfb jrag uvf jnl.

25:1 Naq Vfenry nobqr va Fuvggvz, naq gur crbcyr ortna gb pbzzvg
juberqbz jvgu gur qnhtugref bs Zbno.

25:2 Naq gurl pnyyrq gur crbcyr hagb gur fnpevsvprf bs gurve tbqf: naq
gur crbcyr qvq rng, naq objrq qbja gb gurve tbqf.

25:3 Naq Vfenry wbvarq uvzfrys hagb Onnycrbe: naq gur natre bs gur
YBEQ jnf xvaqyrq ntnvafg Vfenry.

25:4 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Gnxr nyy gur urnqf bs gur crbcyr,
naq unat gurz hc orsber gur YBEQ ntnvafg gur fha, gung gur svrepr
natre bs gur YBEQ znl or ghearq njnl sebz Vfenry.

25:5 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb gur whqtrf bs Vfenry, Fynl lr rirel bar uvf
zra gung jrer wbvarq hagb Onnycrbe.

25:6 Naq, orubyq, bar bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry pnzr naq oebhtug hagb
uvf oerguera n Zvqvnavgvfu jbzna va gur fvtug bs Zbfrf, naq va gur
fvtug bs nyy gur pbatertngvba bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, jub jrer
jrrcvat orsber gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba.

25:7 Naq jura Cuvarunf, gur fba bs Ryrnmne, gur fba bs Nneba gur
cevrfg, fnj vg, ur ebfr hc sebz nzbat gur pbatertngvba, naq gbbx n
wniryva va uvf unaq; 25:8 Naq ur jrag nsgre gur zna bs Vfenry vagb gur
grag, naq guehfg obgu bs gurz guebhtu, gur zna bs Vfenry, naq gur
jbzna guebhtu ure oryyl. Fb gur cynthr jnf fgnlrq sebz gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry.

25:9 Naq gubfr gung qvrq va gur cynthr jrer gjragl naq sbhe gubhfnaq.

25:10 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 25:11 Cuvarunf, gur fba
bs Ryrnmne, gur fba bs Nneba gur cevrfg, ungu ghearq zl jengu njnl
sebz gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, juvyr ur jnf mrnybhf sbe zl fnxr nzbat
gurz, gung V pbafhzrq abg gur puvyqera bs Vfenry va zl wrnybhfl.

25:12 Jurersber fnl, Orubyq, V tvir hagb uvz zl pbiranag bs crnpr:
25:13 Naq ur funyy unir vg, naq uvf frrq nsgre uvz, rira gur pbiranag
bs na rireynfgvat cevrfgubbq; orpnhfr ur jnf mrnybhf sbe uvf Tbq, naq
znqr na ngbarzrag sbe gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

25:14 Abj gur anzr bs gur Vfenryvgr gung jnf fynva, rira gung jnf
fynva jvgu gur Zvqvnavgvfu jbzna, jnf Mvzev, gur fba bs Fnyh, n cevapr
bs n puvrs ubhfr nzbat gur Fvzrbavgrf.

25:15 Naq gur anzr bs gur Zvqvnavgvfu jbzna gung jnf fynva jnf Pbmov,
gur qnhtugre bs Mhe; ur jnf urnq bire n crbcyr, naq bs n puvrs ubhfr
va Zvqvna.

25:16 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 25:17 Irk gur Zvqvnavgrf,
naq fzvgr gurz: 25:18 Sbe gurl irk lbh jvgu gurve jvyrf, jurerjvgu
gurl unir orthvyrq lbh va gur znggre bs Crbe, naq va gur znggre bs
Pbmov, gur qnhtugre bs n cevapr bs Zvqvna, gurve fvfgre, juvpu jnf
fynva va gur qnl bs gur cynthr sbe Crbe'f fnxr.

26:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre gur cynthr, gung gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb
Zbfrf naq hagb Ryrnmne gur fba bs Nneba gur cevrfg, fnlvat, 26:2 Gnxr
gur fhz bs nyy gur pbatertngvba bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, sebz gjragl
lrnef byq naq hcjneq, guebhtubhg gurve snguref' ubhfr, nyy gung ner
noyr gb tb gb jne va Vfenry.

26:3 Naq Zbfrf naq Ryrnmne gur cevrfg fcnxr jvgu gurz va gur cynvaf bs
Zbno ol Wbeqna arne Wrevpub, fnlvat, 26:4 Gnxr gur fhz bs gur crbcyr,
sebz gjragl lrnef byq naq hcjneq; nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf naq gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, juvpu jrag sbegu bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

26:5 Erhora, gur ryqrfg fba bs Vfenry: gur puvyqera bs Erhora; Unabpu,
bs jubz pbzrgu gur snzvyl bs gur Unabpuvgrf: bs Cnyyh, gur snzvyl bs
gur Cnyyhvgrf: 26:6 Bs Urmeba, gur snzvyl bs gur Urmebavgrf: bs Pnezv,
gur snzvyl bs gur Pnezvgrf.

26:7 Gurfr ner gur snzvyvrf bs gur Erhoravgrf: naq gurl gung jrer
ahzorerq bs gurz jrer sbegl naq guerr gubhfnaq naq frira uhaqerq naq
guvegl.

26:8 Naq gur fbaf bs Cnyyh; Ryvno.

26:9 Naq gur fbaf bs Ryvno; Arzhry, naq Qnguna, naq Novenz. Guvf vf
gung Qnguna naq Novenz, juvpu jrer snzbhf va gur pbatertngvba, jub
fgebir ntnvafg Zbfrf naq ntnvafg Nneba va gur pbzcnal bs Xbenu, jura
gurl fgebir ntnvafg gur YBEQ: 26:10 Naq gur rnegu bcrarq ure zbhgu,
naq fjnyybjrq gurz hc gbtrgure jvgu Xbenu, jura gung pbzcnal qvrq,
jung gvzr gur sver qribherq gjb uhaqerq naq svsgl zra: naq gurl orpnzr
n fvta.

26:11 Abgjvgufgnaqvat gur puvyqera bs Xbenu qvrq abg.

26:12 Gur fbaf bs Fvzrba nsgre gurve snzvyvrf: bs Arzhry, gur snzvyl
bs gur Arzhryvgrf: bs Wnzva, gur snzvyl bs gur Wnzvavgrf: bs Wnpuva,
gur snzvyl bs gur Wnpuvavgrf: 26:13 Bs Mrenu, gur snzvyl bs gur
Mneuvgrf: bs Funhy, gur snzvyl bs gur Funhyvgrf.

26:14 Gurfr ner gur snzvyvrf bs gur Fvzrbavgrf, gjragl naq gjb
gubhfnaq naq gjb uhaqerq.

26:15 Gur puvyqera bs Tnq nsgre gurve snzvyvrf: bs Mrcuba, gur snzvyl
bs gur Mrcubavgrf: bs Unttv, gur snzvyl bs gur Unttvgrf: bs Fuhav, gur
snzvyl bs gur Fuhavgrf: 26:16 Bs Bmav, gur snzvyl bs gur Bmavgrf: bs
Rev, gur snzvyl bs gur Revgrf: 26:17 Bs Nebq, gur snzvyl bs gur
Nebqvgrf: bs Neryv, gur snzvyl bs gur Neryvgrf.

26:18 Gurfr ner gur snzvyvrf bs gur puvyqera bs Tnq nppbeqvat gb gubfr
gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, sbegl gubhfnaq naq svir uhaqerq.

26:19 Gur fbaf bs Whqnu jrer Re naq Bana: naq Re naq Bana qvrq va gur
ynaq bs Pnanna.

26:20 Naq gur fbaf bs Whqnu nsgre gurve snzvyvrf jrer; bs Furynu, gur
snzvyl bs gur Furynavgrf: bs Cunerm, gur snzvyl bs gur Cunemvgrf: bs
Mrenu, gur snzvyl bs gur Mneuvgrf.

26:21 Naq gur fbaf bs Cunerm jrer; bs Urmeba, gur snzvyl bs gur
Urmebavgrf: bs Unzhy, gur snzvyl bs gur Unzhyvgrf.

26:22 Gurfr ner gur snzvyvrf bs Whqnu nppbeqvat gb gubfr gung jrer
ahzorerq bs gurz, guerrfpber naq fvkgrra gubhfnaq naq svir uhaqerq.

26:23 Bs gur fbaf bs Vffnpune nsgre gurve snzvyvrf: bs Gbyn, gur
snzvyl bs gur Gbynvgrf: bs Chn, gur snzvyl bs gur Chavgrf: 26:24 Bs
Wnfuho, gur snzvyl bs gur Wnfuhovgrf: bs Fuvzeba, gur snzvyl bs gur
Fuvzebavgrf.

26:25 Gurfr ner gur snzvyvrf bs Vffnpune nppbeqvat gb gubfr gung jrer
ahzorerq bs gurz, guerrfpber naq sbhe gubhfnaq naq guerr uhaqerq.

26:26 Bs gur fbaf bs Mrohyha nsgre gurve snzvyvrf: bs Frerq, gur
snzvyl bs gur Fneqvgrf: bs Ryba, gur snzvyl bs gur Rybavgrf: bs
Wnuyrry, gur snzvyl bs gur Wnuyrryvgrf.

26:27 Gurfr ner gur snzvyvrf bs gur Mrohyhavgrf nppbeqvat gb gubfr
gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, guerrfpber gubhfnaq naq svir uhaqerq.

26:28 Gur fbaf bs Wbfrcu nsgre gurve snzvyvrf jrer Znanffru naq
Rcuenvz.

26:29 Bs gur fbaf bs Znanffru: bs Znpuve, gur snzvyl bs gur
Znpuvevgrf: naq Znpuve ortng Tvyrnq: bs Tvyrnq pbzr gur snzvyl bs gur
Tvyrnqvgrf.

26:30 Gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Tvyrnq: bs Wrrmre, gur snzvyl bs gur
Wrrmrevgrf: bs Uryrx, gur snzvyl bs gur Uryrxvgrf: 26:31 Naq bs
Nfevry, gur snzvyl bs gur Nfevryvgrf: naq bs Furpurz, gur snzvyl bs
gur Furpurzvgrf: 26:32 Naq bs Furzvqn, gur snzvyl bs gur Furzvqnvgrf:
naq bs Urcure, gur snzvyl bs gur Urcurevgrf.

26:33 Naq Mrybcurunq gur fba bs Urcure unq ab fbaf, ohg qnhtugref: naq
gur anzrf bs gur qnhtugref bs Mrybcurunq jrer Znuynu, naq Abnu,
Ubtynu, Zvypnu, naq Gvemnu.

26:34 Gurfr ner gur snzvyvrf bs Znanffru, naq gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq
bs gurz, svsgl naq gjb gubhfnaq naq frira uhaqerq.

26:35 Gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Rcuenvz nsgre gurve snzvyvrf: bs
Fuhgurynu, gur snzvyl bs gur Fuhgunyuvgrf: bs Orpure, gur snzvyl bs
gur Onpuevgrf: bs Gnuna, gur snzvyl bs gur Gnunavgrf.

26:36 Naq gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Fuhgurynu: bs Rena, gur snzvyl bs gur
Renavgrf.

26:37 Gurfr ner gur snzvyvrf bs gur fbaf bs Rcuenvz nppbeqvat gb gubfr
gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz, guvegl naq gjb gubhfnaq naq svir uhaqerq.
Gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Wbfrcu nsgre gurve snzvyvrf.

26:38 Gur fbaf bs Orawnzva nsgre gurve snzvyvrf: bs Oryn, gur snzvyl
bs gur Orynvgrf: bs Nfuory, gur snzvyl bs gur Nfuoryvgrf: bs Nuvenz,
gur snzvyl bs gur Nuvenzvgrf: 26:39 Bs Fuhcunz, gur snzvyl bs gur
Fuhcunzvgrf: bs Uhcunz, gur snzvyl bs gur Uhcunzvgrf.

26:40 Naq gur fbaf bs Oryn jrer Neq naq Annzna: bs Neq, gur snzvyl bs
gur Neqvgrf: naq bs Annzna, gur snzvyl bs gur Annzvgrf.

26:41 Gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Orawnzva nsgre gurve snzvyvrf: naq gurl
gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz jrer sbegl naq svir gubhfnaq naq fvk
uhaqerq.

26:42 Gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Qna nsgre gurve snzvyvrf: bs Fuhunz, gur
snzvyl bs gur Fuhunzvgrf. Gurfr ner gur snzvyvrf bs Qna nsgre gurve
snzvyvrf.

26:43 Nyy gur snzvyvrf bs gur Fuhunzvgrf, nppbeqvat gb gubfr gung jrer
ahzorerq bs gurz, jrer guerrfpber naq sbhe gubhfnaq naq sbhe uhaqerq.

26:44 Bs gur puvyqera bs Nfure nsgre gurve snzvyvrf: bs Wvzan, gur
snzvyl bs gur Wvzavgrf: bs Wrfhv, gur snzvyl bs gur Wrfhvgrf: bs
Orevnu, gur snzvyl bs gur Orevvgrf.

26:45 Bs gur fbaf bs Orevnu: bs Urore, gur snzvyl bs gur Urorevgrf: bs
Znypuvry, gur snzvyl bs gur Znypuvryvgrf.

26:46 Naq gur anzr bs gur qnhtugre bs Nfure jnf Fnenu.

26:47 Gurfr ner gur snzvyvrf bs gur fbaf bs Nfure nppbeqvat gb gubfr
gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz; jub jrer svsgl naq guerr gubhfnaq naq sbhe
uhaqerq.

26:48 Bs gur fbaf bs Ancugnyv nsgre gurve snzvyvrf: bs Wnumrry, gur
snzvyl bs gur Wnumrryvgrf: bs Thav, gur snzvyl bs gur Thavgrf: 26:49
Bs Wrmre, gur snzvyl bs gur Wrmrevgrf: bs Fuvyyrz, gur snzvyl bs gur
Fuvyyrzvgrf.

26:50 Gurfr ner gur snzvyvrf bs Ancugnyv nppbeqvat gb gurve snzvyvrf:
naq gurl gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz jrer sbegl naq svir gubhfnaq naq
sbhe uhaqerq.

26:51 Gurfr jrer gur ahzorerq bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, fvk uhaqerq
gubhfnaq naq n gubhfnaq frira uhaqerq naq guvegl.

26:52 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 26:53 Hagb gurfr gur ynaq
funyy or qvivqrq sbe na vaurevgnapr nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs anzrf.

26:54 Gb znal gubh funyg tvir gur zber vaurevgnapr, naq gb srj gubh
funyg tvir gur yrff vaurevgnapr: gb rirel bar funyy uvf vaurevgnapr or
tvira nppbeqvat gb gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs uvz.

26:55 Abgjvgufgnaqvat gur ynaq funyy or qvivqrq ol ybg: nppbeqvat gb
gur anzrf bs gur gevorf bs gurve snguref gurl funyy vaurevg.

26:56 Nppbeqvat gb gur ybg funyy gur cbffrffvba gurerbs or qvivqrq
orgjrra znal naq srj.

26:57 Naq gurfr ner gurl gung jrer ahzorerq bs gur Yrivgrf nsgre gurve
snzvyvrf: bs Trefuba, gur snzvyl bs gur Trefubavgrf: bs Xbungu, gur
snzvyl bs gur Xbunguvgrf: bs Zrenev, gur snzvyl bs gur Zrenevgrf.

26:58 Gurfr ner gur snzvyvrf bs gur Yrivgrf: gur snzvyl bs gur
Yvoavgrf, gur snzvyl bs gur Uroebavgrf, gur snzvyl bs gur Znuyvgrf,
gur snzvyl bs gur Zhfuvgrf, gur snzvyl bs gur Xbenguvgrf. Naq Xbungu
ortng Nzenz.

26:59 Naq gur anzr bs Nzenz'f jvsr jnf Wbpurorq, gur qnhtugre bs Yriv,
jubz ure zbgure oner gb Yriv va Rtlcg: naq fur oner hagb Nzenz Nneba
naq Zbfrf, naq Zvevnz gurve fvfgre.

26:60 Naq hagb Nneba jnf obea Anqno, naq Novuh, Ryrnmne, naq Vgunzne.

26:61 Naq Anqno naq Novuh qvrq, jura gurl bssrerq fgenatr sver orsber
gur YBEQ.

26:62 Naq gubfr gung jrer ahzorerq bs gurz jrer gjragl naq guerr
gubhfnaq, nyy znyrf sebz n zbagu byq naq hcjneq: sbe gurl jrer abg
ahzorerq nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, orpnhfr gurer jnf ab
vaurevgnapr tvira gurz nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

26:63 Gurfr ner gurl gung jrer ahzorerq ol Zbfrf naq Ryrnmne gur
cevrfg, jub ahzorerq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry va gur cynvaf bs Zbno ol
Wbeqna arne Wrevpub.

26:64 Ohg nzbat gurfr gurer jnf abg n zna bs gurz jubz Zbfrf naq Nneba
gur cevrfg ahzorerq, jura gurl ahzorerq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry va gur
jvyqrearff bs Fvanv.

26:65 Sbe gur YBEQ unq fnvq bs gurz, Gurl funyy fheryl qvr va gur
jvyqrearff. Naq gurer jnf abg yrsg n zna bs gurz, fnir Pnyro gur fba
bs Wrcuhaaru, naq Wbfuhn gur fba bs Aha.

27:1 Gura pnzr gur qnhtugref bs Mrybcurunq, gur fba bs Urcure, gur fba
bs Tvyrnq, gur fba bs Znpuve, gur fba bs Znanffru, bs gur snzvyvrf bs
Znanffru gur fba bs Wbfrcu: naq gurfr ner gur anzrf bs uvf qnhtugref;
Znuynu, Abnu, naq Ubtynu, naq Zvypnu, naq Gvemnu.

27:2 Naq gurl fgbbq orsber Zbfrf, naq orsber Ryrnmne gur cevrfg, naq
orsber gur cevaprf naq nyy gur pbatertngvba, ol gur qbbe bs gur
gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, fnlvat, 27:3 Bhe sngure qvrq va gur
jvyqrearff, naq ur jnf abg va gur pbzcnal bs gurz gung tngurerq
gurzfryirf gbtrgure ntnvafg gur YBEQ va gur pbzcnal bs Xbenu; ohg qvrq
va uvf bja fva, naq unq ab fbaf.

27:4 Jul fubhyq gur anzr bs bhe sngure or qbar njnl sebz nzbat uvf
snzvyl, orpnhfr ur ungu ab fba? Tvir hagb hf gurersber n cbffrffvba
nzbat gur oerguera bs bhe sngure.

27:5 Naq Zbfrf oebhtug gurve pnhfr orsber gur YBEQ.

27:6 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 27:7 Gur qnhtugref bs
Mrybcurunq fcrnx evtug: gubh funyg fheryl tvir gurz n cbffrffvba bs na
vaurevgnapr nzbat gurve sngure'f oerguera; naq gubh funyg pnhfr gur
vaurevgnapr bs gurve sngure gb cnff hagb gurz.

27:8 Naq gubh funyg fcrnx hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Vs n
zna qvr, naq unir ab fba, gura lr funyy pnhfr uvf vaurevgnapr gb cnff
hagb uvf qnhtugre.

27:9 Naq vs ur unir ab qnhtugre, gura lr funyy tvir uvf vaurevgnapr
hagb uvf oerguera.

27:10 Naq vs ur unir ab oerguera, gura lr funyy tvir uvf vaurevgnapr
hagb uvf sngure'f oerguera.

27:11 Naq vs uvf sngure unir ab oerguera, gura lr funyy tvir uvf
vaurevgnapr hagb uvf xvafzna gung vf arkg gb uvz bs uvf snzvyl, naq ur
funyy cbffrff vg: naq vg funyy or hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry n
fgnghgr bs whqtzrag, nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

27:12 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Trg gurr hc vagb guvf zbhag
Nonevz, naq frr gur ynaq juvpu V unir tvira hagb gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry.

27:13 Naq jura gubh unfg frra vg, gubh nyfb funyg or tngurerq hagb gul
crbcyr, nf Nneba gul oebgure jnf tngurerq.

27:14 Sbe lr eroryyrq ntnvafg zl pbzznaqzrag va gur qrfreg bs Mva, va
gur fgevsr bs gur pbatertngvba, gb fnapgvsl zr ng gur jngre orsber
gurve rlrf: gung vf gur jngre bs Zrevonu va Xnqrfu va gur jvyqrearff
bs Mva.

27:15 Naq Zbfrf fcnxr hagb gur YBEQ, fnlvat, 27:16 Yrg gur YBEQ, gur
Tbq bs gur fcvevgf bs nyy syrfu, frg n zna bire gur pbatertngvba,
27:17 Juvpu znl tb bhg orsber gurz, naq juvpu znl tb va orsber gurz,
naq juvpu znl yrnq gurz bhg, naq juvpu znl oevat gurz va; gung gur
pbatertngvba bs gur YBEQ or abg nf furrc juvpu unir ab furcureq.

27:18 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Gnxr gurr Wbfuhn gur fba bs Aha, n
zna va jubz vf gur fcvevg, naq ynl guvar unaq hcba uvz; 27:19 Naq frg
uvz orsber Ryrnmne gur cevrfg, naq orsber nyy gur pbatertngvba; naq
tvir uvz n punetr va gurve fvtug.

27:20 Naq gubh funyg chg fbzr bs guvar ubabhe hcba uvz, gung nyy gur
pbatertngvba bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry znl or borqvrag.

27:21 Naq ur funyy fgnaq orsber Ryrnmne gur cevrfg, jub funyy nfx
pbhafry sbe uvz nsgre gur whqtzrag bs Hevz orsber gur YBEQ: ng uvf
jbeq funyy gurl tb bhg, naq ng uvf jbeq gurl funyy pbzr va, obgu ur,
naq nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jvgu uvz, rira nyy gur pbatertngvba.

27:22 Naq Zbfrf qvq nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq uvz: naq ur gbbx Wbfuhn, naq
frg uvz orsber Ryrnmne gur cevrfg, naq orsber nyy gur pbatertngvba:
27:23 Naq ur ynvq uvf unaqf hcba uvz, naq tnir uvz n punetr, nf gur
YBEQ pbzznaqrq ol gur unaq bs Zbfrf.

28:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 28:2 Pbzznaq gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry, naq fnl hagb gurz, Zl bssrevat, naq zl oernq sbe zl
fnpevsvprf znqr ol sver, sbe n fjrrg fnibhe hagb zr, funyy lr bofreir
gb bssre hagb zr va gurve qhr frnfba.

28:3 Naq gubh funyg fnl hagb gurz, Guvf vf gur bssrevat znqr ol sver
juvpu lr funyy bssre hagb gur YBEQ; gjb ynzof bs gur svefg lrne
jvgubhg fcbg qnl ol qnl, sbe n pbagvahny oheag bssrevat.

28:4 Gur bar ynzo funyg gubh bssre va gur zbeavat, naq gur bgure ynzo
funyg gubh bssre ng rira; 28:5 Naq n gragu cneg bs na rcunu bs sybhe
sbe n zrng bssrevat, zvatyrq jvgu gur sbhegu cneg bs na uva bs orngra
bvy.

28:6 Vg vf n pbagvahny oheag bssrevat, juvpu jnf beqnvarq va zbhag
Fvanv sbe n fjrrg fnibhe, n fnpevsvpr znqr ol sver hagb gur YBEQ.

28:7 Naq gur qevax bssrevat gurerbs funyy or gur sbhegu cneg bs na uva
sbe gur bar ynzo: va gur ubyl cynpr funyg gubh pnhfr gur fgebat jvar
gb or cbherq hagb gur YBEQ sbe n qevax bssrevat.

28:8 Naq gur bgure ynzo funyg gubh bssre ng rira: nf gur zrng bssrevat
bs gur zbeavat, naq nf gur qevax bssrevat gurerbs, gubh funyg bssre
vg, n fnpevsvpr znqr ol sver, bs n fjrrg fnibhe hagb gur YBEQ.

28:9 Naq ba gur fnoongu qnl gjb ynzof bs gur svefg lrne jvgubhg fcbg,
naq gjb gragu qrnyf bs sybhe sbe n zrng bssrevat, zvatyrq jvgu bvy,
naq gur qevax bssrevat gurerbs: 28:10 Guvf vf gur oheag bssrevat bs
rirel fnoongu, orfvqr gur pbagvahny oheag bssrevat, naq uvf qevax
bssrevat.

28:11 Naq va gur ortvaavatf bs lbhe zbaguf lr funyy bssre n oheag
bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ; gjb lbhat ohyybpxf, naq bar enz, frira ynzof
bs gur svefg lrne jvgubhg fcbg; 28:12 Naq guerr gragu qrnyf bs sybhe
sbe n zrng bssrevat, zvatyrq jvgu bvy, sbe bar ohyybpx; naq gjb gragu
qrnyf bs sybhe sbe n zrng bssrevat, zvatyrq jvgu bvy, sbe bar enz;
28:13 Naq n frireny gragu qrny bs sybhe zvatyrq jvgu bvy sbe n zrng
bssrevat hagb bar ynzo; sbe n oheag bssrevat bs n fjrrg fnibhe, n
fnpevsvpr znqr ol sver hagb gur YBEQ.

28:14 Naq gurve qevax bssrevatf funyy or unys na uva bs jvar hagb n
ohyybpx, naq gur guveq cneg bs na uva hagb n enz, naq n sbhegu cneg bs
na uva hagb n ynzo: guvf vf gur oheag bssrevat bs rirel zbagu
guebhtubhg gur zbaguf bs gur lrne.

28:15 Naq bar xvq bs gur tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ funyy
or bssrerq, orfvqr gur pbagvahny oheag bssrevat, naq uvf qevax
bssrevat.

28:16 Naq va gur sbhegrragu qnl bs gur svefg zbagu vf gur cnffbire bs
gur YBEQ.

28:17 Naq va gur svsgrragu qnl bs guvf zbagu vf gur srnfg: frira qnlf
funyy hayrnirarq oernq or rngra.

28:18 Va gur svefg qnl funyy or na ubyl pbaibpngvba; lr funyy qb ab
znaare bs freivyr jbex gurerva: 28:19 Ohg lr funyy bssre n fnpevsvpr
znqr ol sver sbe n oheag bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ; gjb lbhat ohyybpxf,
naq bar enz, naq frira ynzof bs gur svefg lrne: gurl funyy or hagb lbh
jvgubhg oyrzvfu: 28:20 Naq gurve zrng bssrevat funyy or bs sybhe
zvatyrq jvgu bvy: guerr gragu qrnyf funyy lr bssre sbe n ohyybpx, naq
gjb gragu qrnyf sbe n enz; 28:21 N frireny gragu qrny funyg gubh bssre
sbe rirel ynzo, guebhtubhg gur frira ynzof: 28:22 Naq bar tbng sbe n
fva bssrevat, gb znxr na ngbarzrag sbe lbh.

28:23 Lr funyy bssre gurfr orfvqr gur oheag bssrevat va gur zbeavat,
juvpu vf sbe n pbagvahny oheag bssrevat.

28:24 Nsgre guvf znaare lr funyy bssre qnvyl, guebhtubhg gur frira
qnlf, gur zrng bs gur fnpevsvpr znqr ol sver, bs n fjrrg fnibhe hagb
gur YBEQ: vg funyy or bssrerq orfvqr gur pbagvahny oheag bssrevat, naq
uvf qevax bssrevat.

28:25 Naq ba gur friragu qnl lr funyy unir na ubyl pbaibpngvba; lr
funyy qb ab freivyr jbex.

28:26 Nyfb va gur qnl bs gur svefgsehvgf, jura lr oevat n arj zrng
bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ, nsgre lbhe jrrxf or bhg, lr funyy unir na ubyl
pbaibpngvba; lr funyy qb ab freivyr jbex: 28:27 Ohg lr funyy bssre gur
oheag bssrevat sbe n fjrrg fnibhe hagb gur YBEQ; gjb lbhat ohyybpxf,
bar enz, frira ynzof bs gur svefg lrne; 28:28 Naq gurve zrng bssrevat
bs sybhe zvatyrq jvgu bvy, guerr gragu qrnyf hagb bar ohyybpx, gjb
gragu qrnyf hagb bar enz, 28:29 N frireny gragu qrny hagb bar ynzo,
guebhtubhg gur frira ynzof; 28:30 Naq bar xvq bs gur tbngf, gb znxr na
ngbarzrag sbe lbh.

28:31 Lr funyy bssre gurz orfvqr gur pbagvahny oheag bssrevat, naq uvf
zrng bssrevat, (gurl funyy or hagb lbh jvgubhg oyrzvfu) naq gurve
qevax bssrevatf.

29:1 Naq va gur friragu zbagu, ba gur svefg qnl bs gur zbagu, lr funyy
unir na ubyl pbaibpngvba; lr funyy qb ab freivyr jbex: vg vf n qnl bs
oybjvat gur gehzcrgf hagb lbh.

29:2 Naq lr funyy bssre n oheag bssrevat sbe n fjrrg fnibhe hagb gur
YBEQ; bar lbhat ohyybpx, bar enz, naq frira ynzof bs gur svefg lrne
jvgubhg oyrzvfu: 29:3 Naq gurve zrng bssrevat funyy or bs sybhe
zvatyrq jvgu bvy, guerr gragu qrnyf sbe n ohyybpx, naq gjb gragu qrnyf
sbe n enz, 29:4 Naq bar gragu qrny sbe bar ynzo, guebhtubhg gur frira
ynzof: 29:5 Naq bar xvq bs gur tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat, gb znxr na
ngbarzrag sbe lbh: 29:6 Orfvqr gur oheag bssrevat bs gur zbagu, naq
uvf zrng bssrevat, naq gur qnvyl oheag bssrevat, naq uvf zrng
bssrevat, naq gurve qevax bssrevatf, nppbeqvat hagb gurve znaare, sbe
n fjrrg fnibhe, n fnpevsvpr znqr ol sver hagb gur YBEQ.

29:7 Naq lr funyy unir ba gur gragu qnl bs guvf friragu zbagu na ubyl
pbaibpngvba; naq lr funyy nssyvpg lbhe fbhyf: lr funyy abg qb nal jbex
gurerva: 29:8 Ohg lr funyy bssre n oheag bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ sbe n
fjrrg fnibhe; bar lbhat ohyybpx, bar enz, naq frira ynzof bs gur svefg
lrne; gurl funyy or hagb lbh jvgubhg oyrzvfu: 29:9 Naq gurve zrng
bssrevat funyy or bs sybhe zvatyrq jvgu bvy, guerr gragu qrnyf gb n
ohyybpx, naq gjb gragu qrnyf gb bar enz, 29:10 N frireny gragu qrny
sbe bar ynzo, guebhtubhg gur frira ynzof: 29:11 Bar xvq bs gur tbngf
sbe n fva bssrevat; orfvqr gur fva bssrevat bs ngbarzrag, naq gur
pbagvahny oheag bssrevat, naq gur zrng bssrevat bs vg, naq gurve qevax
bssrevatf.

29:12 Naq ba gur svsgrragu qnl bs gur friragu zbagu lr funyy unir na
ubyl pbaibpngvba; lr funyy qb ab freivyr jbex, naq lr funyy xrrc n
srnfg hagb gur YBEQ frira qnlf: 29:13 Naq lr funyy bssre n oheag
bssrevat, n fnpevsvpr znqr ol sver, bs n fjrrg fnibhe hagb gur YBEQ;
guvegrra lbhat ohyybpxf, gjb enzf, naq sbhegrra ynzof bs gur svefg
lrne; gurl funyy or jvgubhg oyrzvfu: 29:14 Naq gurve zrng bssrevat
funyy or bs sybhe zvatyrq jvgu bvy, guerr gragu qrnyf hagb rirel
ohyybpx bs gur guvegrra ohyybpxf, gjb gragu qrnyf gb rnpu enz bs gur
gjb enzf, 29:15 Naq n frireny gragu qrny gb rnpu ynzo bs gur sbhegrra
ynzof: 29:16 Naq bar xvq bs gur tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat; orfvqr gur
pbagvahny oheag bssrevat, uvf zrng bssrevat, naq uvf qevax bssrevat.

29:17 Naq ba gur frpbaq qnl lr funyy bssre gjryir lbhat ohyybpxf, gjb
enzf, sbhegrra ynzof bs gur svefg lrne jvgubhg fcbg: 29:18 Naq gurve
zrng bssrevat naq gurve qevax bssrevatf sbe gur ohyybpxf, sbe gur
enzf, naq sbe gur ynzof, funyy or nppbeqvat gb gurve ahzore, nsgre gur
znaare: 29:19 Naq bar xvq bs gur tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat; orfvqr gur
pbagvahny oheag bssrevat, naq gur zrng bssrevat gurerbs, naq gurve
qevax bssrevatf.

29:20 Naq ba gur guveq qnl ryrira ohyybpxf, gjb enzf, sbhegrra ynzof
bs gur svefg lrne jvgubhg oyrzvfu; 29:21 Naq gurve zrng bssrevat naq
gurve qevax bssrevatf sbe gur ohyybpxf, sbe gur enzf, naq sbe gur
ynzof, funyy or nppbeqvat gb gurve ahzore, nsgre gur znaare: 29:22 Naq
bar tbng sbe n fva bssrevat; orfvqr gur pbagvahny oheag bssrevat, naq
uvf zrng bssrevat, naq uvf qevax bssrevat.

29:23 Naq ba gur sbhegu qnl gra ohyybpxf, gjb enzf, naq sbhegrra ynzof
bs gur svefg lrne jvgubhg oyrzvfu: 29:24 Gurve zrng bssrevat naq gurve
qevax bssrevatf sbe gur ohyybpxf, sbe gur enzf, naq sbe gur ynzof,
funyy or nppbeqvat gb gurve ahzore, nsgre gur znaare: 29:25 Naq bar
xvq bs gur tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat; orfvqr gur pbagvahny oheag
bssrevat, uvf zrng bssrevat, naq uvf qevax bssrevat.

29:26 Naq ba gur svsgu qnl avar ohyybpxf, gjb enzf, naq sbhegrra ynzof
bs gur svefg lrne jvgubhg fcbg: 29:27 Naq gurve zrng bssrevat naq
gurve qevax bssrevatf sbe gur ohyybpxf, sbe gur enzf, naq sbe gur
ynzof, funyy or nppbeqvat gb gurve ahzore, nsgre gur znaare: 29:28 Naq
bar tbng sbe n fva bssrevat; orfvqr gur pbagvahny oheag bssrevat, naq
uvf zrng bssrevat, naq uvf qevax bssrevat.

29:29 Naq ba gur fvkgu qnl rvtug ohyybpxf, gjb enzf, naq sbhegrra
ynzof bs gur svefg lrne jvgubhg oyrzvfu: 29:30 Naq gurve zrng bssrevat
naq gurve qevax bssrevatf sbe gur ohyybpxf, sbe gur enzf, naq sbe gur
ynzof, funyy or nppbeqvat gb gurve ahzore, nsgre gur znaare: 29:31 Naq
bar tbng sbe n fva bssrevat; orfvqr gur pbagvahny oheag bssrevat, uvf
zrng bssrevat, naq uvf qevax bssrevat.

29:32 Naq ba gur friragu qnl frira ohyybpxf, gjb enzf, naq sbhegrra
ynzof bs gur svefg lrne jvgubhg oyrzvfu: 29:33 Naq gurve zrng bssrevat
naq gurve qevax bssrevatf sbe gur ohyybpxf, sbe gur enzf, naq sbe gur
ynzof, funyy or nppbeqvat gb gurve ahzore, nsgre gur znaare: 29:34 Naq
bar tbng sbe n fva bssrevat; orfvqr gur pbagvahny oheag bssrevat, uvf
zrng bssrevat, naq uvf qevax bssrevat.

29:35 Ba gur rvtugu qnl lr funyy unir n fbyrza nffrzoyl: lr funyy qb
ab freivyr jbex gurerva: 29:36 Ohg lr funyy bssre n oheag bssrevat, n
fnpevsvpr znqr ol sver, bs n fjrrg fnibhe hagb gur YBEQ: bar ohyybpx,
bar enz, frira ynzof bs gur svefg lrne jvgubhg oyrzvfu: 29:37 Gurve
zrng bssrevat naq gurve qevax bssrevatf sbe gur ohyybpx, sbe gur enz,
naq sbe gur ynzof, funyy or nppbeqvat gb gurve ahzore, nsgre gur
znaare: 29:38 Naq bar tbng sbe n fva bssrevat; orfvqr gur pbagvahny
oheag bssrevat, naq uvf zrng bssrevat, naq uvf qevax bssrevat.

29:39 Gurfr guvatf lr funyy qb hagb gur YBEQ va lbhe frg srnfgf,
orfvqr lbhe ibjf, naq lbhe serrjvyy bssrevatf, sbe lbhe oheag
bssrevatf, naq sbe lbhe zrng bssrevatf, naq sbe lbhe qevax bssrevatf,
naq sbe lbhe crnpr bssrevatf.

29:40 Naq Zbfrf gbyq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry nppbeqvat gb nyy gung gur
YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

30:1 Naq Zbfrf fcnxr hagb gur urnqf bs gur gevorf pbapreavat gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Guvf vf gur guvat juvpu gur YBEQ ungu
pbzznaqrq.

30:2 Vs n zna ibj n ibj hagb gur YBEQ, be fjrne na bngu gb ovaq uvf
fbhy jvgu n obaq; ur funyy abg oernx uvf jbeq, ur funyy qb nppbeqvat
gb nyy gung cebprrqrgu bhg bs uvf zbhgu.

30:3 Vs n jbzna nyfb ibj n ibj hagb gur YBEQ, naq ovaq urefrys ol n
obaq, orvat va ure sngure'f ubhfr va ure lbhgu; 30:4 Naq ure sngure
urne ure ibj, naq ure obaq jurerjvgu fur ungu obhaq ure fbhy, naq ure
sngure funyy ubyq uvf crnpr ng ure; gura nyy ure ibjf funyy fgnaq, naq
rirel obaq jurerjvgu fur ungu obhaq ure fbhy funyy fgnaq.

30:5 Ohg vs ure sngure qvfnyybj ure va gur qnl gung ur urnergu; abg
nal bs ure ibjf, be bs ure obaqf jurerjvgu fur ungu obhaq ure fbhy,
funyy fgnaq: naq gur YBEQ funyy sbetvir ure, orpnhfr ure sngure
qvfnyybjrq ure.

30:6 Naq vs fur unq ng nyy na uhfonaq, jura fur ibjrq, be hggrerq
bhtug bhg bs ure yvcf, jurerjvgu fur obhaq ure fbhy; 30:7 Naq ure
uhfonaq urneq vg, naq uryq uvf crnpr ng ure va gur qnl gung ur urneq
vg: gura ure ibjf funyy fgnaq, naq ure obaqf jurerjvgu fur obhaq ure
fbhy funyy fgnaq.

30:8 Ohg vs ure uhfonaq qvfnyybjrq ure ba gur qnl gung ur urneq vg;
gura ur funyy znxr ure ibj juvpu fur ibjrq, naq gung juvpu fur hggrerq
jvgu ure yvcf, jurerjvgu fur obhaq ure fbhy, bs abar rssrpg: naq gur
YBEQ funyy sbetvir ure.

30:9 Ohg rirel ibj bs n jvqbj, naq bs ure gung vf qvibeprq, jurerjvgu
gurl unir obhaq gurve fbhyf, funyy fgnaq ntnvafg ure.

30:10 Naq vs fur ibjrq va ure uhfonaq'f ubhfr, be obhaq ure fbhy ol n
obaq jvgu na bngu; 30:11 Naq ure uhfonaq urneq vg, naq uryq uvf crnpr
ng ure, naq qvfnyybjrq ure abg: gura nyy ure ibjf funyy fgnaq, naq
rirel obaq jurerjvgu fur obhaq ure fbhy funyy fgnaq.

30:12 Ohg vs ure uhfonaq ungu hggreyl znqr gurz ibvq ba gur qnl ur
urneq gurz; gura jungfbrire cebprrqrq bhg bs ure yvcf pbapreavat ure
ibjf, be pbapreavat gur obaq bs ure fbhy, funyy abg fgnaq: ure uhfonaq
ungu znqr gurz ibvq; naq gur YBEQ funyy sbetvir ure.

30:13 Rirel ibj, naq rirel ovaqvat bngu gb nssyvpg gur fbhy, ure
uhfonaq znl rfgnoyvfu vg, be ure uhfonaq znl znxr vg ibvq.

30:14 Ohg vs ure uhfonaq nygbtrgure ubyq uvf crnpr ng ure sebz qnl gb
qnl; gura ur rfgnoyvfurgu nyy ure ibjf, be nyy ure obaqf, juvpu ner
hcba ure: ur pbasvezrgu gurz, orpnhfr ur uryq uvf crnpr ng ure va gur
qnl gung ur urneq gurz.

30:15 Ohg vs ur funyy nal jnlf znxr gurz ibvq nsgre gung ur ungu urneq
gurz; gura ur funyy orne ure vavdhvgl.

30:16 Gurfr ner gur fgnghgrf, juvpu gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf, orgjrra
n zna naq uvf jvsr, orgjrra gur sngure naq uvf qnhtugre, orvat lrg va
ure lbhgu va ure sngure'f ubhfr.

31:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 31:2 Niratr gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry bs gur Zvqvnavgrf: nsgrejneq funyg gubh or tngurerq hagb gul
crbcyr.

31:3 Naq Zbfrf fcnxr hagb gur crbcyr, fnlvat, Nez fbzr bs lbhefryirf
hagb gur jne, naq yrg gurz tb ntnvafg gur Zvqvnavgrf, naq niratr gur
YBEQ bs Zvqvna.

31:4 Bs rirel gevor n gubhfnaq, guebhtubhg nyy gur gevorf bs Vfenry,
funyy lr fraq gb gur jne.

31:5 Fb gurer jrer qryvirerq bhg bs gur gubhfnaqf bs Vfenry, n
gubhfnaq bs rirel gevor, gjryir gubhfnaq nezrq sbe jne.

31:6 Naq Zbfrf frag gurz gb gur jne, n gubhfnaq bs rirel gevor, gurz
naq Cuvarunf gur fba bs Ryrnmne gur cevrfg, gb gur jne, jvgu gur ubyl
vafgehzragf, naq gur gehzcrgf gb oybj va uvf unaq.

31:7 Naq gurl jneerq ntnvafg gur Zvqvnavgrf, nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq
Zbfrf; naq gurl fyrj nyy gur znyrf.

31:8 Naq gurl fyrj gur xvatf bs Zvqvna, orfvqr gur erfg bs gurz gung
jrer fynva; anzryl, Riv, naq Erxrz, naq Mhe, naq Uhe, naq Eron, svir
xvatf bs Zvqvna: Onynnz nyfb gur fba bs Orbe gurl fyrj jvgu gur fjbeq.

31:9 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry gbbx nyy gur jbzra bs Zvqvna pncgvirf,
naq gurve yvggyr barf, naq gbbx gur fcbvy bs nyy gurve pnggyr, naq nyy
gurve sybpxf, naq nyy gurve tbbqf.

31:10 Naq gurl oheag nyy gurve pvgvrf jurerva gurl qjryg, naq nyy
gurve tbbqyl pnfgyrf, jvgu sver.

31:11 Naq gurl gbbx nyy gur fcbvy, naq nyy gur cerl, obgu bs zra naq
bs ornfgf.

31:12 Naq gurl oebhtug gur pncgvirf, naq gur cerl, naq gur fcbvy, hagb
Zbfrf, naq Ryrnmne gur cevrfg, naq hagb gur pbatertngvba bs gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, hagb gur pnzc ng gur cynvaf bs Zbno, juvpu ner ol
Wbeqna arne Wrevpub.

31:13 Naq Zbfrf, naq Ryrnmne gur cevrfg, naq nyy gur cevaprf bs gur
pbatertngvba, jrag sbegu gb zrrg gurz jvgubhg gur pnzc.

31:14 Naq Zbfrf jnf jebgu jvgu gur bssvpref bs gur ubfg, jvgu gur
pncgnvaf bire gubhfnaqf, naq pncgnvaf bire uhaqerqf, juvpu pnzr sebz
gur onggyr.

31:15 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb gurz, Unir lr fnirq nyy gur jbzra nyvir?
31:16 Orubyq, gurfr pnhfrq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, guebhtu gur pbhafry
bs Onynnz, gb pbzzvg gerfcnff ntnvafg gur YBEQ va gur znggre bs Crbe,
naq gurer jnf n cynthr nzbat gur pbatertngvba bs gur YBEQ.

31:17 Abj gurersber xvyy rirel znyr nzbat gur yvggyr barf, naq xvyy
rirel jbzna gung ungu xabja zna ol ylvat jvgu uvz.

31:18 Ohg nyy gur jbzra puvyqera, gung unir abg xabja n zna ol ylvat
jvgu uvz, xrrc nyvir sbe lbhefryirf.

31:19 Naq qb lr novqr jvgubhg gur pnzc frira qnlf: jubfbrire ungu
xvyyrq nal crefba, naq jubfbrire ungu gbhpurq nal fynva, chevsl obgu
lbhefryirf naq lbhe pncgvirf ba gur guveq qnl, naq ba gur friragu qnl.

31:20 Naq chevsl nyy lbhe envzrag, naq nyy gung vf znqr bs fxvaf, naq
nyy jbex bs tbngf' unve, naq nyy guvatf znqr bs jbbq.

31:21 Naq Ryrnmne gur cevrfg fnvq hagb gur zra bs jne juvpu jrag gb
gur onggyr, Guvf vf gur beqvanapr bs gur ynj juvpu gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq
Zbfrf; 31:22 Bayl gur tbyq, naq gur fvyire, gur oenff, gur veba, gur
gva, naq gur yrnq, 31:23 Rirel guvat gung znl novqr gur sver, lr funyy
znxr vg tb guebhtu gur sver, naq vg funyy or pyrna: arireguryrff vg
funyy or chevsvrq jvgu gur jngre bs frcnengvba: naq nyy gung novqrgu
abg gur sver lr funyy znxr tb guebhtu gur jngre.

31:24 Naq lr funyy jnfu lbhe pybgurf ba gur friragu qnl, naq lr funyy
or pyrna, naq nsgrejneq lr funyy pbzr vagb gur pnzc.

31:25 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 31:26 Gnxr gur fhz bs gur
cerl gung jnf gnxra, obgu bs zna naq bs ornfg, gubh, naq Ryrnmne gur
cevrfg, naq gur puvrs snguref bs gur pbatertngvba: 31:27 Naq qvivqr
gur cerl vagb gjb cnegf; orgjrra gurz gung gbbx gur jne hcba gurz, jub
jrag bhg gb onggyr, naq orgjrra nyy gur pbatertngvba: 31:28 Naq yril n
gevohgr hagb gur Ybeq bs gur zra bs jne juvpu jrag bhg gb onggyr: bar
fbhy bs svir uhaqerq, obgu bs gur crefbaf, naq bs gur orrirf, naq bs
gur nffrf, naq bs gur furrc: 31:29 Gnxr vg bs gurve unys, naq tvir vg
hagb Ryrnmne gur cevrfg, sbe na urnir bssrevat bs gur YBEQ.

31:30 Naq bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry'f unys, gubh funyg gnxr bar
cbegvba bs svsgl, bs gur crefbaf, bs gur orrirf, bs gur nffrf, naq bs
gur sybpxf, bs nyy znaare bs ornfgf, naq tvir gurz hagb gur Yrivgrf,
juvpu xrrc gur punetr bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur YBEQ.

31:31 Naq Zbfrf naq Ryrnmne gur cevrfg qvq nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq
Zbfrf.

31:32 Naq gur obbgl, orvat gur erfg bs gur cerl juvpu gur zra bs jne
unq pnhtug, jnf fvk uhaqerq gubhfnaq naq friragl gubhfnaq naq svir
gubhfnaq furrc, 31:33 Naq guerrfpber naq gjryir gubhfnaq orrirf, 31:34
Naq guerrfpber naq bar gubhfnaq nffrf, 31:35 Naq guvegl naq gjb
gubhfnaq crefbaf va nyy, bs jbzra gung unq abg xabja zna ol ylvat jvgu
uvz.

31:36 Naq gur unys, juvpu jnf gur cbegvba bs gurz gung jrag bhg gb
jne, jnf va ahzore guerr uhaqerq gubhfnaq naq frira naq guvegl
gubhfnaq naq svir uhaqerq furrc: 31:37 Naq gur YBEQ'f gevohgr bs gur
furrc jnf fvk uhaqerq naq guerrfpber naq svsgrra.

31:38 Naq gur orrirf jrer guvegl naq fvk gubhfnaq; bs juvpu gur YBEQ'f
gevohgr jnf guerrfpber naq gjryir.

31:39 Naq gur nffrf jrer guvegl gubhfnaq naq svir uhaqerq; bs juvpu
gur YBEQ'f gevohgr jnf guerrfpber naq bar.

31:40 Naq gur crefbaf jrer fvkgrra gubhfnaq; bs juvpu gur YBEQ'f
gevohgr jnf guvegl naq gjb crefbaf.

31:41 Naq Zbfrf tnir gur gevohgr, juvpu jnf gur YBEQ'f urnir bssrevat,
hagb Ryrnmne gur cevrfg, nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

31:42 Naq bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry'f unys, juvpu Zbfrf qvivqrq sebz
gur zra gung jneerq, 31:43 (Abj gur unys gung cregnvarq hagb gur
pbatertngvba jnf guerr uhaqerq gubhfnaq naq guvegl gubhfnaq naq frira
gubhfnaq naq svir uhaqerq furrc, 31:44 Naq guvegl naq fvk gubhfnaq
orrirf, 31:45 Naq guvegl gubhfnaq nffrf naq svir uhaqerq, 31:46 Naq
fvkgrra gubhfnaq crefbaf;) 31:47 Rira bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry'f
unys, Zbfrf gbbx bar cbegvba bs svsgl, obgu bs zna naq bs ornfg, naq
tnir gurz hagb gur Yrivgrf, juvpu xrcg gur punetr bs gur gnoreanpyr bs
gur YBEQ; nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

31:48 Naq gur bssvpref juvpu jrer bire gubhfnaqf bs gur ubfg, gur
pncgnvaf bs gubhfnaqf, naq pncgnvaf bs uhaqerqf, pnzr arne hagb Zbfrf:
31:49 Naq gurl fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Gul freinagf unir gnxra gur fhz bs gur
zra bs jne juvpu ner haqre bhe punetr, naq gurer ynpxrgu abg bar zna
bs hf.

31:50 Jr unir gurersber oebhtug na boyngvba sbe gur YBEQ, jung rirel
zna ungu tbggra, bs wrjryf bs tbyq, punvaf, naq oenpryrgf, evatf,
rneevatf, naq gnoyrgf, gb znxr na ngbarzrag sbe bhe fbhyf orsber gur
YBEQ.

31:51 Naq Zbfrf naq Ryrnmne gur cevrfg gbbx gur tbyq bs gurz, rira nyy
jebhtug wrjryf.

31:52 Naq nyy gur tbyq bs gur bssrevat gung gurl bssrerq hc gb gur
YBEQ, bs gur pncgnvaf bs gubhfnaqf, naq bs gur pncgnvaf bs uhaqerqf,
jnf fvkgrra gubhfnaq frira uhaqerq naq svsgl furxryf.

31:53 (Sbe gur zra bs jne unq gnxra fcbvy, rirel zna sbe uvzfrys.)
31:54 Naq Zbfrf naq Ryrnmne gur cevrfg gbbx gur tbyq bs gur pncgnvaf
bs gubhfnaqf naq bs uhaqerqf, naq oebhtug vg vagb gur gnoreanpyr bs
gur pbatertngvba, sbe n zrzbevny sbe gur puvyqera bs Vfenry orsber gur
YBEQ.

32:1 Abj gur puvyqera bs Erhora naq gur puvyqera bs Tnq unq n irel
terng zhygvghqr bs pnggyr: naq jura gurl fnj gur ynaq bs Wnmre, naq
gur ynaq bs Tvyrnq, gung, orubyq, gur cynpr jnf n cynpr sbe pnggyr;
32:2 Gur puvyqera bs Tnq naq gur puvyqera bs Erhora pnzr naq fcnxr
hagb Zbfrf, naq gb Ryrnmne gur cevrfg, naq hagb gur cevaprf bs gur
pbatertngvba, fnlvat, 32:3 Ngnebgu, naq Qvoba, naq Wnmre, naq Avzenu,
naq Urfuoba, naq Ryrnyru, naq Furonz, naq Arob, naq Orba, 32:4 Rira
gur pbhagel juvpu gur YBEQ fzbgr orsber gur pbatertngvba bs Vfenry, vf
n ynaq sbe pnggyr, naq gul freinagf unir pnggyr: 32:5 Jurersber, fnvq
gurl, vs jr unir sbhaq tenpr va gul fvtug, yrg guvf ynaq or tvira hagb
gul freinagf sbe n cbffrffvba, naq oevat hf abg bire Wbeqna.

32:6 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb gur puvyqera bs Tnq naq gb gur puvyqera bs
Erhora, Funyy lbhe oerguera tb gb jne, naq funyy lr fvg urer?  32:7
Naq jurersber qvfpbhentr lr gur urneg bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry sebz
tbvat bire vagb gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ ungu tvira gurz?  32:8 Guhf
qvq lbhe snguref, jura V frag gurz sebz Xnqrfuonearn gb frr gur ynaq.

32:9 Sbe jura gurl jrag hc hagb gur inyyrl bs Rfupby, naq fnj gur
ynaq, gurl qvfpbhentrq gur urneg bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, gung gurl
fubhyq abg tb vagb gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ unq tvira gurz.

32:10 Naq gur YBEQ'f natre jnf xvaqyrq gur fnzr gvzr, naq ur fjner,
fnlvat, 32:11 Fheryl abar bs gur zra gung pnzr hc bhg bs Rtlcg, sebz
gjragl lrnef byq naq hcjneq, funyy frr gur ynaq juvpu V fjner hagb
Noenunz, hagb Vfnnp, naq hagb Wnpbo; orpnhfr gurl unir abg jubyyl
sbyybjrq zr: 32:12 Fnir Pnyro gur fba bs Wrcuhaaru gur Xrarmvgr, naq
Wbfuhn gur fba bs Aha: sbe gurl unir jubyyl sbyybjrq gur YBEQ.

32:13 Naq gur YBEQ'f natre jnf xvaqyrq ntnvafg Vfenry, naq ur znqr
gurz jnaqre va gur jvyqrearff sbegl lrnef, hagvy nyy gur trarengvba,
gung unq qbar rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, jnf pbafhzrq.

32:14 Naq, orubyq, lr ner evfra hc va lbhe snguref' fgrnq, na vapernfr
bs fvashy zra, gb nhtzrag lrg gur svrepr natre bs gur YBEQ gbjneq
Vfenry.

32:15 Sbe vs lr ghea njnl sebz nsgre uvz, ur jvyy lrg ntnva yrnir gurz
va gur jvyqrearff; naq lr funyy qrfgebl nyy guvf crbcyr.

32:16 Naq gurl pnzr arne hagb uvz, naq fnvq, Jr jvyy ohvyq furrcsbyqf
urer sbe bhe pnggyr, naq pvgvrf sbe bhe yvggyr barf: 32:17 Ohg jr
bhefryirf jvyy tb ernql nezrq orsber gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, hagvy jr
unir oebhtug gurz hagb gurve cynpr: naq bhe yvggyr barf funyy qjryy va
gur sraprq pvgvrf orpnhfr bs gur vaunovgnagf bs gur ynaq.

32:18 Jr jvyy abg erghea hagb bhe ubhfrf, hagvy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry
unir vaurevgrq rirel zna uvf vaurevgnapr.

32:19 Sbe jr jvyy abg vaurevg jvgu gurz ba lbaqre fvqr Wbeqna, be
sbejneq; orpnhfr bhe vaurevgnapr vf snyyra gb hf ba guvf fvqr Wbeqna
rnfgjneq.

32:20 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb gurz, Vs lr jvyy qb guvf guvat, vs lr jvyy
tb nezrq orsber gur YBEQ gb jne, 32:21 Naq jvyy tb nyy bs lbh nezrq
bire Wbeqna orsber gur YBEQ, hagvy ur ungu qevira bhg uvf rarzvrf sebz
orsber uvz, 32:22 Naq gur ynaq or fhoqhrq orsber gur YBEQ: gura
nsgrejneq lr funyy erghea, naq or thvygyrff orsber gur YBEQ, naq
orsber Vfenry; naq guvf ynaq funyy or lbhe cbffrffvba orsber gur YBEQ.

32:23 Ohg vs lr jvyy abg qb fb, orubyq, lr unir fvaarq ntnvafg gur
YBEQ: naq or fher lbhe fva jvyy svaq lbh bhg.

32:24 Ohvyq lbh pvgvrf sbe lbhe yvggyr barf, naq sbyqf sbe lbhe furrc;
naq qb gung juvpu ungu cebprrqrq bhg bs lbhe zbhgu.

32:25 Naq gur puvyqera bs Tnq naq gur puvyqera bs Erhora fcnxr hagb
Zbfrf, fnlvat, Gul freinagf jvyy qb nf zl ybeq pbzznaqrgu.

32:26 Bhe yvggyr barf, bhe jvirf, bhe sybpxf, naq nyy bhe pnggyr,
funyy or gurer va gur pvgvrf bs Tvyrnq: 32:27 Ohg gul freinagf jvyy
cnff bire, rirel zna nezrq sbe jne, orsber gur YBEQ gb onggyr, nf zl
ybeq fnvgu.

32:28 Fb pbapreavat gurz Zbfrf pbzznaqrq Ryrnmne gur cevrfg, naq
Wbfuhn gur fba bs Aha, naq gur puvrs snguref bs gur gevorf bs gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry: 32:29 Naq Zbfrf fnvq hagb gurz, Vs gur puvyqera bs
Tnq naq gur puvyqera bs Erhora jvyy cnff jvgu lbh bire Wbeqna, rirel
zna nezrq gb onggyr, orsber gur YBEQ, naq gur ynaq funyy or fhoqhrq
orsber lbh; gura lr funyy tvir gurz gur ynaq bs Tvyrnq sbe n
cbffrffvba: 32:30 Ohg vs gurl jvyy abg cnff bire jvgu lbh nezrq, gurl
funyy unir cbffrffvbaf nzbat lbh va gur ynaq bs Pnanna.

32:31 Naq gur puvyqera bs Tnq naq gur puvyqera bs Erhora nafjrerq,
fnlvat, Nf gur YBEQ ungu fnvq hagb gul freinagf, fb jvyy jr qb.

32:32 Jr jvyy cnff bire nezrq orsber gur YBEQ vagb gur ynaq bs Pnanna,
gung gur cbffrffvba bs bhe vaurevgnapr ba guvf fvqr Wbeqna znl or
bhef.

32:33 Naq Zbfrf tnir hagb gurz, rira gb gur puvyqera bs Tnq, naq gb
gur puvyqera bs Erhora, naq hagb unys gur gevor bs Znanffru gur fba bs
Wbfrcu, gur xvatqbz bs Fvuba xvat bs gur Nzbevgrf, naq gur xvatqbz bs
Bt xvat bs Onfuna, gur ynaq, jvgu gur pvgvrf gurerbs va gur pbnfgf,
rira gur pvgvrf bs gur pbhagel ebhaq nobhg.

32:34 Naq gur puvyqera bs Tnq ohvyg Qvoba, naq Ngnebgu, naq Nebre,
32:35 Naq Ngebgu, Fubcuna, naq Wnnmre, naq Wbtorunu, 32:36 Naq
Orguavzenu, naq Orguunena, sraprq pvgvrf: naq sbyqf sbe furrc.

32:37 Naq gur puvyqera bs Erhora ohvyg Urfuoba, naq Ryrnyru, naq
Xvewngunvz, 32:38 Naq Arob, naq Onnyzrba, (gurve anzrf orvat punatrq,)
naq Fuvoznu: naq tnir bgure anzrf hagb gur pvgvrf juvpu gurl ohvyqrq.

32:39 Naq gur puvyqera bs Znpuve gur fba bs Znanffru jrag gb Tvyrnq,
naq gbbx vg, naq qvfcbffrffrq gur Nzbevgr juvpu jnf va vg.

32:40 Naq Zbfrf tnir Tvyrnq hagb Znpuve gur fba bs Znanffru; naq ur
qjryg gurerva.

32:41 Naq Wnve gur fba bs Znanffru jrag naq gbbx gur fznyy gbjaf
gurerbs, naq pnyyrq gurz Unibguwnve.

32:42 Naq Abonu jrag naq gbbx Xrangu, naq gur ivyyntrf gurerbs, naq
pnyyrq vg Abonu, nsgre uvf bja anzr.

33:1 Gurfr ner gur wbhearlf bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, juvpu jrag
sbegu bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg jvgu gurve nezvrf haqre gur unaq bs
Zbfrf naq Nneba.

33:2 Naq Zbfrf jebgr gurve tbvatf bhg nppbeqvat gb gurve wbhearlf ol
gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ: naq gurfr ner gurve wbhearlf nppbeqvat gb
gurve tbvatf bhg.

33:3 Naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz Enzrfrf va gur svefg zbagu, ba gur
svsgrragu qnl bs gur svefg zbagu; ba gur zbeebj nsgre gur cnffbire gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry jrag bhg jvgu na uvtu unaq va gur fvtug bs nyy gur
Rtlcgvnaf.

33:4 Sbe gur Rtlcgvnaf ohevrq nyy gurve svefgobea, juvpu gur YBEQ unq
fzvggra nzbat gurz: hcba gurve tbqf nyfb gur YBEQ rkrphgrq whqtzragf.

33:5 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry erzbirq sebz Enzrfrf, naq cvgpurq va
Fhppbgu.

33:6 Naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz Fhppbgu, naq cvgpurq va Rgunz, juvpu vf va
gur rqtr bs gur jvyqrearff.

33:7 Naq gurl erzbirq sebz Rgunz, naq ghearq ntnva hagb Cvunuvebgu,
juvpu vf orsber Onnymrcuba: naq gurl cvgpurq orsber Zvtqby.

33:8 Naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz orsber Cvunuvebgu, naq cnffrq guebhtu gur
zvqfg bs gur frn vagb gur jvyqrearff, naq jrag guerr qnlf' wbhearl va
gur jvyqrearff bs Rgunz, naq cvgpurq va Znenu.

33:9 Naq gurl erzbirq sebz Znenu, naq pnzr hagb Ryvz: naq va Ryvz jrer
gjryir sbhagnvaf bs jngre, naq guerrfpber naq gra cnyz gerrf; naq gurl
cvgpurq gurer.

33:10 Naq gurl erzbirq sebz Ryvz, naq rapnzcrq ol gur Erq frn.

33:11 Naq gurl erzbirq sebz gur Erq frn, naq rapnzcrq va gur
jvyqrearff bs Fva.

33:12 Naq gurl gbbx gurve wbhearl bhg bs gur jvyqrearff bs Fva, naq
rapnzcrq va Qbcuxnu.

33:13 Naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz Qbcuxnu, naq rapnzcrq va Nyhfu.

33:14 Naq gurl erzbirq sebz Nyhfu, naq rapnzcrq ng Ercuvqvz, jurer jnf
ab jngre sbe gur crbcyr gb qevax.

33:15 Naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz Ercuvqvz, naq cvgpurq va gur jvyqrearff
bs Fvanv.

33:16 Naq gurl erzbirq sebz gur qrfreg bs Fvanv, naq cvgpurq ng
Xvoebguunggnninu.

33:17 Naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz Xvoebguunggnninu, naq rapnzcrq ng
Unmrebgu.

33:18 Naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz Unmrebgu, naq cvgpurq va Evguznu.

33:19 Naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz Evguznu, naq cvgpurq ng Evzzbacnerm.

33:20 Naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz Evzzbacnerm, naq cvgpurq va Yvoanu.

33:21 Naq gurl erzbirq sebz Yvoanu, naq cvgpurq ng Evffnu.

33:22 Naq gurl wbhearlrq sebz Evffnu, naq cvgpurq va Xruryngunu.

33:23 Naq gurl jrag sebz Xruryngunu, naq cvgpurq va zbhag Funcure.

33:24 Naq gurl erzbirq sebz zbhag Funcure, naq rapnzcrq va Unenqnu.

33:25 Naq gurl erzbirq sebz Unenqnu, naq cvgpurq va Znxurybgu.

33:26 Naq gurl erzbirq sebz Znxurybgu, naq rapnzcrq ng Gnungu.

33:27 Naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz Gnungu, naq cvgpurq ng Gnenu.

33:28 Naq gurl erzbirq sebz Gnenu, naq cvgpurq va Zvgupnu.

33:29 Naq gurl jrag sebz Zvgupnu, naq cvgpurq va Unfuzbanu.

33:30 Naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz Unfuzbanu, naq rapnzcrq ng Zbfrebgu.

33:31 Naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz Zbfrebgu, naq cvgpurq va Orarwnnxna.

33:32 Naq gurl erzbirq sebz Orarwnnxna, naq rapnzcrq ng Ubeuntvqtnq.

33:33 Naq gurl jrag sebz Ubeuntvqtnq, naq cvgpurq va Wbgongunu.

33:34 Naq gurl erzbirq sebz Wbgongunu, naq rapnzcrq ng Roebanu.

33:35 Naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz Roebanu, naq rapnzcrq ng Rmvbatnore.

33:36 Naq gurl erzbirq sebz Rmvbatnore, naq cvgpurq va gur jvyqrearff
bs Mva, juvpu vf Xnqrfu.

33:37 Naq gurl erzbirq sebz Xnqrfu, naq cvgpurq va zbhag Ube, va gur
rqtr bs gur ynaq bs Rqbz.

33:38 Naq Nneba gur cevrfg jrag hc vagb zbhag Ube ng gur pbzznaqzrag
bs gur YBEQ, naq qvrq gurer, va gur sbegvrgu lrne nsgre gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry jrer pbzr bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, va gur svefg qnl bs gur
svsgu zbagu.

33:39 Naq Nneba jnf na uhaqerq naq gjragl naq guerr lrnef byq jura ur
qvrq va zbhag Ube.

33:40 Naq xvat Nenq gur Pnannavgr, juvpu qjryg va gur fbhgu va gur
ynaq bs Pnanna, urneq bs gur pbzvat bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

33:41 Naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz zbhag Ube, naq cvgpurq va Mnyzbanu.

33:42 Naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz Mnyzbanu, naq cvgpurq va Chaba.

33:43 Naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz Chaba, naq cvgpurq va Bobgu.

33:44 Naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz Bobgu, naq cvgpurq va Vwrnonevz, va gur
obeqre bs Zbno.

33:45 Naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz Vvz, naq cvgpurq va Qvobatnq.

33:46 Naq gurl erzbirq sebz Qvobatnq, naq rapnzcrq va Nyzbaqvoyngunvz.

33:47 Naq gurl erzbirq sebz Nyzbaqvoyngunvz, naq cvgpurq va gur
zbhagnvaf bs Nonevz, orsber Arob.

33:48 Naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz gur zbhagnvaf bs Nonevz, naq cvgpurq va
gur cynvaf bs Zbno ol Wbeqna arne Wrevpub.

33:49 Naq gurl cvgpurq ol Wbeqna, sebz Orguwrfvzbgu rira hagb
Noryfuvggvz va gur cynvaf bs Zbno.

33:50 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf va gur cynvaf bs Zbno ol Wbeqna
arne Wrevpub, fnlvat, 33:51 Fcrnx hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq fnl
hagb gurz, Jura lr ner cnffrq bire Wbeqna vagb gur ynaq bs Pnanna;
33:52 Gura lr funyy qevir bhg nyy gur vaunovgnagf bs gur ynaq sebz
orsber lbh, naq qrfgebl nyy gurve cvpgherf, naq qrfgebl nyy gurve
zbygra vzntrf, naq dhvgr cyhpx qbja nyy gurve uvtu cynprf: 33:53 Naq
lr funyy qvfcbffrff gur vaunovgnagf bs gur ynaq, naq qjryy gurerva:
sbe V unir tvira lbh gur ynaq gb cbffrff vg.

33:54 Naq lr funyy qvivqr gur ynaq ol ybg sbe na vaurevgnapr nzbat
lbhe snzvyvrf: naq gb gur zber lr funyy tvir gur zber vaurevgnapr, naq
gb gur srjre lr funyy tvir gur yrff vaurevgnapr: rirel zna'f
vaurevgnapr funyy or va gur cynpr jurer uvf ybg snyyrgu; nppbeqvat gb
gur gevorf bs lbhe snguref lr funyy vaurevg.

33:55 Ohg vs lr jvyy abg qevir bhg gur vaunovgnagf bs gur ynaq sebz
orsber lbh; gura vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, gung gubfr juvpu lr yrg erznva
bs gurz funyy or cevpxf va lbhe rlrf, naq gubeaf va lbhe fvqrf, naq
funyy irk lbh va gur ynaq jurerva lr qjryy.

33:56 Zberbire vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, gung V funyy qb hagb lbh, nf V
gubhtug gb qb hagb gurz.

34:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 34:2 Pbzznaq gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry, naq fnl hagb gurz, Jura lr pbzr vagb gur ynaq bs Pnanna;
(guvf vf gur ynaq gung funyy snyy hagb lbh sbe na vaurevgnapr, rira
gur ynaq bs Pnanna jvgu gur pbnfgf gurerbs:) 34:3 Gura lbhe fbhgu
dhnegre funyy or sebz gur jvyqrearff bs Mva nybat ol gur pbnfg bs
Rqbz, naq lbhe fbhgu obeqre funyy or gur bhgzbfg pbnfg bs gur fnyg frn
rnfgjneq: 34:4 Naq lbhe obeqre funyy ghea sebz gur fbhgu gb gur nfprag
bs Nxenoovz, naq cnff ba gb Mva: naq gur tbvat sbegu gurerbs funyy or
sebz gur fbhgu gb Xnqrfuonearn, naq funyy tb ba gb Unmnenqqne, naq
cnff ba gb Nmzba: 34:5 Naq gur obeqre funyy srgpu n pbzcnff sebz Nmzba
hagb gur evire bs Rtlcg, naq gur tbvatf bhg bs vg funyy or ng gur frn.

34:6 Naq nf sbe gur jrfgrea obeqre, lr funyy rira unir gur terng frn
sbe n obeqre: guvf funyy or lbhe jrfg obeqre.

34:7 Naq guvf funyy or lbhe abegu obeqre: sebz gur terng frn lr funyy
cbvag bhg sbe lbh zbhag Ube: 34:8 Sebz zbhag Ube lr funyy cbvag bhg
lbhe obeqre hagb gur ragenapr bs Unzngu; naq gur tbvatf sbegu bs gur
obeqre funyy or gb Mrqnq: 34:9 Naq gur obeqre funyy tb ba gb Mvcueba,
naq gur tbvatf bhg bs vg funyy or ng Unmnerana: guvf funyy or lbhe
abegu obeqre.

34:10 Naq lr funyy cbvag bhg lbhe rnfg obeqre sebz Unmnerana gb
Furcunz: 34:11 Naq gur pbnfg funyy tb qbja sebz Furcunz gb Evoynu, ba
gur rnfg fvqr bs Nva; naq gur obeqre funyy qrfpraq, naq funyy ernpu
hagb gur fvqr bs gur frn bs Puvaarergu rnfgjneq: 34:12 Naq gur obeqre
funyy tb qbja gb Wbeqna, naq gur tbvatf bhg bs vg funyy or ng gur fnyg
frn: guvf funyy or lbhe ynaq jvgu gur pbnfgf gurerbs ebhaq nobhg.

34:13 Naq Zbfrf pbzznaqrq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Guvf vf gur
ynaq juvpu lr funyy vaurevg ol ybg, juvpu gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq gb tvir
hagb gur avar gevorf, naq gb gur unys gevor: 34:14 Sbe gur gevor bs
gur puvyqera bs Erhora nppbeqvat gb gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, naq
gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Tnq nppbeqvat gb gur ubhfr bs gurve
snguref, unir erprvirq gurve vaurevgnapr; naq unys gur gevor bs
Znanffru unir erprvirq gurve vaurevgnapr: 34:15 Gur gjb gevorf naq gur
unys gevor unir erprvirq gurve vaurevgnapr ba guvf fvqr Wbeqna arne
Wrevpub rnfgjneq, gbjneq gur fhaevfvat.

34:16 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 34:17 Gurfr ner gur anzrf
bs gur zra juvpu funyy qvivqr gur ynaq hagb lbh: Ryrnmne gur cevrfg,
naq Wbfuhn gur fba bs Aha.

34:18 Naq lr funyy gnxr bar cevapr bs rirel gevor, gb qvivqr gur ynaq
ol vaurevgnapr.

34:19 Naq gur anzrf bs gur zra ner gurfr: Bs gur gevor bs Whqnu, Pnyro
gur fba bs Wrcuhaaru.

34:20 Naq bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Fvzrba, Furzhry gur fba bs
Nzzvuhq.

34:21 Bs gur gevor bs Orawnzva, Ryvqnq gur fba bs Puvfyba.

34:22 Naq gur cevapr bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Qna, Ohxxv gur
fba bs Wbtyv.

34:23 Gur cevapr bs gur puvyqera bs Wbfrcu, sbe gur gevor bs gur
puvyqera bs Znanffru, Unaavry gur fba bs Rcubq.

34:24 Naq gur cevapr bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Rcuenvz, Xrzhry
gur fba bs Fuvcugna.

34:25 Naq gur cevapr bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Mrohyha,
Ryvmncuna gur fba bs Cneanpu.

34:26 Naq gur cevapr bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Vffnpune, Cnygvry
gur fba bs Nmmna.

34:27 Naq gur cevapr bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Nfure, Nuvuhq gur
fba bs Furybzv.

34:28 Naq gur cevapr bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Ancugnyv, Crqnury
gur fba bs Nzzvuhq.

34:29 Gurfr ner gurl jubz gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq gb qvivqr gur vaurevgnapr
hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry va gur ynaq bs Pnanna.

35:1 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf va gur cynvaf bs Zbno ol Wbeqna
arne Wrevpub, fnlvat, 35:2 Pbzznaq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, gung gurl
tvir hagb gur Yrivgrf bs gur vaurevgnapr bs gurve cbffrffvba pvgvrf gb
qjryy va; naq lr funyy tvir nyfb hagb gur Yrivgrf fhoheof sbe gur
pvgvrf ebhaq nobhg gurz.

35:3 Naq gur pvgvrf funyy gurl unir gb qjryy va; naq gur fhoheof bs
gurz funyy or sbe gurve pnggyr, naq sbe gurve tbbqf, naq sbe nyy gurve
ornfgf.

35:4 Naq gur fhoheof bs gur pvgvrf, juvpu lr funyy tvir hagb gur
Yrivgrf, funyy ernpu sebz gur jnyy bs gur pvgl naq bhgjneq n gubhfnaq
phovgf ebhaq nobhg.

35:5 Naq lr funyy zrnfher sebz jvgubhg gur pvgl ba gur rnfg fvqr gjb
gubhfnaq phovgf, naq ba gur fbhgu fvqr gjb gubhfnaq phovgf, naq ba gur
jrfg fvqr gjb gubhfnaq phovgf, naq ba gur abegu fvqr gjb gubhfnaq
phovgf; naq gur pvgl funyy or va gur zvqfg: guvf funyy or gb gurz gur
fhoheof bs gur pvgvrf.

35:6 Naq nzbat gur pvgvrf juvpu lr funyy tvir hagb gur Yrivgrf gurer
funyy or fvk pvgvrf sbe ershtr, juvpu lr funyy nccbvag sbe gur
znafynlre, gung ur znl syrr guvgure: naq gb gurz lr funyy nqq sbegl
naq gjb pvgvrf.

35:7 Fb nyy gur pvgvrf juvpu lr funyy tvir gb gur Yrivgrf funyy or
sbegl naq rvtug pvgvrf: gurz funyy lr tvir jvgu gurve fhoheof.

35:8 Naq gur pvgvrf juvpu lr funyy tvir funyy or bs gur cbffrffvba bs
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry: sebz gurz gung unir znal lr funyy tvir znal;
ohg sebz gurz gung unir srj lr funyy tvir srj: rirel bar funyy tvir bs
uvf pvgvrf hagb gur Yrivgrf nppbeqvat gb uvf vaurevgnapr juvpu ur
vaurevgrgu.

35:9 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf, fnlvat, 35:10 Fcrnx hagb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq fnl hagb gurz, Jura lr or pbzr bire Wbeqna
vagb gur ynaq bs Pnanna; 35:11 Gura lr funyy nccbvag lbh pvgvrf gb or
pvgvrf bs ershtr sbe lbh; gung gur fynlre znl syrr guvgure, juvpu
xvyyrgu nal crefba ng hanjnerf.

35:12 Naq gurl funyy or hagb lbh pvgvrf sbe ershtr sebz gur niratre;
gung gur znafynlre qvr abg, hagvy ur fgnaq orsber gur pbatertngvba va
whqtzrag.

35:13 Naq bs gurfr pvgvrf juvpu lr funyy tvir fvk pvgvrf funyy lr unir
sbe ershtr.

35:14 Lr funyy tvir guerr pvgvrf ba guvf fvqr Wbeqna, naq guerr pvgvrf
funyy lr tvir va gur ynaq bs Pnanna, juvpu funyy or pvgvrf bs ershtr.

35:15 Gurfr fvk pvgvrf funyy or n ershtr, obgu sbe gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, naq sbe gur fgenatre, naq sbe gur fbwbheare nzbat gurz: gung
rirel bar gung xvyyrgu nal crefba hanjnerf znl syrr guvgure.

35:16 Naq vs ur fzvgr uvz jvgu na vafgehzrag bs veba, fb gung ur qvr,
ur vf n zheqrere: gur zheqrere funyy fheryl or chg gb qrngu.

35:17 Naq vs ur fzvgr uvz jvgu guebjvat n fgbar, jurerjvgu ur znl qvr,
naq ur qvr, ur vf n zheqrere: gur zheqrere funyy fheryl or chg gb
qrngu.

35:18 Be vs ur fzvgr uvz jvgu na unaq jrncba bs jbbq, jurerjvgu ur znl
qvr, naq ur qvr, ur vf n zheqrere: gur zheqrere funyy fheryl or chg gb
qrngu.

35:19 Gur eriratre bs oybbq uvzfrys funyy fynl gur zheqrere: jura ur
zrrgrgu uvz, ur funyy fynl uvz.

35:20 Ohg vs ur guehfg uvz bs ungerq, be uhey ng uvz ol ynlvat bs
jnvg, gung ur qvr; 35:21 Be va razvgl fzvgr uvz jvgu uvf unaq, gung ur
qvr: ur gung fzbgr uvz funyy fheryl or chg gb qrngu; sbe ur vf n
zheqrere: gur eriratre bs oybbq funyy fynl gur zheqrere, jura ur
zrrgrgu uvz.

35:22 Ohg vs ur guehfg uvz fhqqrayl jvgubhg razvgl, be unir pnfg hcba
uvz nal guvat jvgubhg ynlvat bs jnvg, 35:23 Be jvgu nal fgbar,
jurerjvgu n zna znl qvr, frrvat uvz abg, naq pnfg vg hcba uvz, gung ur
qvr, naq jnf abg uvf rarzl, arvgure fbhtug uvf unez: 35:24 Gura gur
pbatertngvba funyy whqtr orgjrra gur fynlre naq gur eriratre bs oybbq
nppbeqvat gb gurfr whqtzragf: 35:25 Naq gur pbatertngvba funyy qryvire
gur fynlre bhg bs gur unaq bs gur eriratre bs oybbq, naq gur
pbatertngvba funyy erfgber uvz gb gur pvgl bs uvf ershtr, juvgure ur
jnf syrq: naq ur funyy novqr va vg hagb gur qrngu bs gur uvtu cevrfg,
juvpu jnf nabvagrq jvgu gur ubyl bvy.

35:26 Ohg vs gur fynlre funyy ng nal gvzr pbzr jvgubhg gur obeqre bs
gur pvgl bs uvf ershtr, juvgure ur jnf syrq; 35:27 Naq gur eriratre bs
oybbq svaq uvz jvgubhg gur obeqref bs gur pvgl bs uvf ershtr, naq gur
eriratre bs oybbq xvyy gur fynlre; ur funyy abg or thvygl bs oybbq:
35:28 Orpnhfr ur fubhyq unir erznvarq va gur pvgl bs uvf ershtr hagvy
gur qrngu bs gur uvtu cevrfg: ohg nsgre gur qrngu bs gur uvtu cevrfg
gur fynlre funyy erghea vagb gur ynaq bs uvf cbffrffvba.

35:29 Fb gurfr guvatf funyy or sbe n fgnghgr bs whqtzrag hagb lbh
guebhtubhg lbhe trarengvbaf va nyy lbhe qjryyvatf.

35:30 Jubfb xvyyrgu nal crefba, gur zheqrere funyy or chg gb qrngu ol
gur zbhgu bs jvgarffrf: ohg bar jvgarff funyy abg grfgvsl ntnvafg nal
crefba gb pnhfr uvz gb qvr.

35:31 Zberbire lr funyy gnxr ab fngvfsnpgvba sbe gur yvsr bs n
zheqrere, juvpu vf thvygl bs qrngu: ohg ur funyy or fheryl chg gb
qrngu.

35:32 Naq lr funyy gnxr ab fngvfsnpgvba sbe uvz gung vf syrq gb gur
pvgl bs uvf ershtr, gung ur fubhyq pbzr ntnva gb qjryy va gur ynaq,
hagvy gur qrngu bs gur cevrfg.

35:33 Fb lr funyy abg cbyyhgr gur ynaq jurerva lr ner: sbe oybbq vg
qrsvyrgu gur ynaq: naq gur ynaq pnaabg or pyrnafrq bs gur oybbq gung
vf furq gurerva, ohg ol gur oybbq bs uvz gung furq vg.

35:34 Qrsvyr abg gurersber gur ynaq juvpu lr funyy vaunovg, jurerva V
qjryy: sbe V gur YBEQ qjryy nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

36:1 Naq gur puvrs snguref bs gur snzvyvrf bs gur puvyqera bs Tvyrnq,
gur fba bs Znpuve, gur fba bs Znanffru, bs gur snzvyvrf bs gur fbaf bs
Wbfrcu, pnzr arne, naq fcnxr orsber Zbfrf, naq orsber gur cevaprf, gur
puvrs snguref bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry: 36:2 Naq gurl fnvq, Gur YBEQ
pbzznaqrq zl ybeq gb tvir gur ynaq sbe na vaurevgnapr ol ybg gb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry: naq zl ybeq jnf pbzznaqrq ol gur YBEQ gb tvir gur
vaurevgnapr bs Mrybcurunq bhe oebgure hagb uvf qnhtugref.

36:3 Naq vs gurl or zneevrq gb nal bs gur fbaf bs gur bgure gevorf bs
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, gura funyy gurve vaurevgnapr or gnxra sebz gur
vaurevgnapr bs bhe snguref, naq funyy or chg gb gur vaurevgnapr bs gur
gevor jurerhagb gurl ner erprvirq: fb funyy vg or gnxra sebz gur ybg
bs bhe vaurevgnapr.

36:4 Naq jura gur whovyr bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry funyy or, gura
funyy gurve vaurevgnapr or chg hagb gur vaurevgnapr bs gur gevor
jurerhagb gurl ner erprvirq: fb funyy gurve vaurevgnapr or gnxra njnl
sebz gur vaurevgnapr bs gur gevor bs bhe snguref.

36:5 Naq Zbfrf pbzznaqrq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq
bs gur YBEQ, fnlvat, Gur gevor bs gur fbaf bs Wbfrcu ungu fnvq jryy.

36:6 Guvf vf gur guvat juvpu gur YBEQ qbgu pbzznaq pbapreavat gur
qnhtugref bs Mrybcurunq, fnlvat, Yrg gurz zneel gb jubz gurl guvax
orfg; bayl gb gur snzvyl bs gur gevor bs gurve sngure funyy gurl
zneel.

36:7 Fb funyy abg gur vaurevgnapr bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry erzbir
sebz gevor gb gevor: sbe rirel bar bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry funyy
xrrc uvzfrys gb gur vaurevgnapr bs gur gevor bs uvf snguref.

36:8 Naq rirel qnhtugre, gung cbffrffrgu na vaurevgnapr va nal gevor
bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, funyy or jvsr hagb bar bs gur snzvyl bs gur
gevor bs ure sngure, gung gur puvyqera bs Vfenry znl rawbl rirel zna
gur vaurevgnapr bs uvf snguref.

36:9 Arvgure funyy gur vaurevgnapr erzbir sebz bar gevor gb nabgure
gevor; ohg rirel bar bs gur gevorf bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry funyy
xrrc uvzfrys gb uvf bja vaurevgnapr.

36:10 Rira nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf, fb qvq gur qnhtugref bs
Mrybcurunq: 36:11 Sbe Znuynu, Gvemnu, naq Ubtynu, naq Zvypnu, naq
Abnu, gur qnhtugref bs Mrybcurunq, jrer zneevrq hagb gurve sngure'f
oebguref' fbaf: 36:12 Naq gurl jrer zneevrq vagb gur snzvyvrf bs gur
fbaf bs Znanffru gur fba bs Wbfrcu, naq gurve vaurevgnapr erznvarq va
gur gevor bs gur snzvyl bs gurve sngure.

36:13 Gurfr ner gur pbzznaqzragf naq gur whqtzragf, juvpu gur YBEQ
pbzznaqrq ol gur unaq bs Zbfrf hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry va gur
cynvaf bs Zbno ol Wbeqna arne Wrevpub.




Gur Svsgu Obbx bs Zbfrf:  Pnyyrq Qrhgrebabzl


1:1 Gurfr or gur jbeqf juvpu Zbfrf fcnxr hagb nyy Vfenry ba guvf fvqr
Wbeqna va gur jvyqrearff, va gur cynva bire ntnvafg gur Erq frn,
orgjrra Cnena, naq Gbcury, naq Ynona, naq Unmrebgu, naq Qvmnuno.

1:2 (Gurer ner ryrira qnlf' wbhearl sebz Ubero ol gur jnl bs zbhag
Frve hagb Xnqrfuonearn.)  1:3 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gur sbegvrgu
lrne, va gur ryriragu zbagu, ba gur svefg qnl bs gur zbagu, gung Zbfrf
fcnxr hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, nppbeqvat hagb nyy gung gur YBEQ
unq tvira uvz va pbzznaqzrag hagb gurz; 1:4 Nsgre ur unq fynva Fvuba
gur xvat bs gur Nzbevgrf, juvpu qjryg va Urfuoba, naq Bt gur xvat bs
Onfuna, juvpu qjryg ng Nfgnebgu va Rqerv: 1:5 Ba guvf fvqr Wbeqna, va
gur ynaq bs Zbno, ortna Zbfrf gb qrpyner guvf ynj, fnlvat, 1:6 Gur
YBEQ bhe Tbq fcnxr hagb hf va Ubero, fnlvat, Lr unir qjryg ybat rabhtu
va guvf zbhag: 1:7 Ghea lbh, naq gnxr lbhe wbhearl, naq tb gb gur
zbhag bs gur Nzbevgrf, naq hagb nyy gur cynprf avtu gurerhagb, va gur
cynva, va gur uvyyf, naq va gur inyr, naq va gur fbhgu, naq ol gur frn
fvqr, gb gur ynaq bs gur Pnannavgrf, naq hagb Yronaba, hagb gur terng
evire, gur evire Rhcuengrf.

1:8 Orubyq, V unir frg gur ynaq orsber lbh: tb va naq cbffrff gur ynaq
juvpu gur YBEQ fjner hagb lbhe snguref, Noenunz, Vfnnp, naq Wnpbo, gb
tvir hagb gurz naq gb gurve frrq nsgre gurz.

1:9 Naq V fcnxr hagb lbh ng gung gvzr, fnlvat, V nz abg noyr gb orne
lbh zlfrys nybar: 1:10 Gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq ungu zhygvcyvrq lbh, naq,
orubyq, lr ner guvf qnl nf gur fgnef bs urnira sbe zhygvghqr.

1:11 (Gur YBEQ Tbq bs lbhe snguref znxr lbh n gubhfnaq gvzrf fb znal
zber nf lr ner, naq oyrff lbh, nf ur ungu cebzvfrq lbh!)  1:12 Ubj pna
V zlfrys nybar orne lbhe phzoenapr, naq lbhe oheqra, naq lbhe fgevsr?
1:13 Gnxr lbh jvfr zra, naq haqrefgnaqvat, naq xabja nzbat lbhe
gevorf, naq V jvyy znxr gurz ehyref bire lbh.

1:14 Naq lr nafjrerq zr, naq fnvq, Gur guvat juvpu gubh unfg fcbxra vf
tbbq sbe hf gb qb.

1:15 Fb V gbbx gur puvrs bs lbhe gevorf, jvfr zra, naq xabja, naq znqr
gurz urnqf bire lbh, pncgnvaf bire gubhfnaqf, naq pncgnvaf bire
uhaqerqf, naq pncgnvaf bire svsgvrf, naq pncgnvaf bire graf, naq
bssvpref nzbat lbhe gevorf.

1:16 Naq V punetrq lbhe whqtrf ng gung gvzr, fnlvat, Urne gur pnhfrf
orgjrra lbhe oerguera, naq whqtr evtugrbhfyl orgjrra rirel zna naq uvf
oebgure, naq gur fgenatre gung vf jvgu uvz.

1:17 Lr funyy abg erfcrpg crefbaf va whqtzrag; ohg lr funyy urne gur
fznyy nf jryy nf gur terng; lr funyy abg or nsenvq bs gur snpr bs zna;
sbe gur whqtzrag vf Tbq'f: naq gur pnhfr gung vf gbb uneq sbe lbh,
oevat vg hagb zr, naq V jvyy urne vg.

1:18 Naq V pbzznaqrq lbh ng gung gvzr nyy gur guvatf juvpu lr fubhyq
qb.

1:19 Naq jura jr qrcnegrq sebz Ubero, jr jrag guebhtu nyy gung terng
naq greevoyr jvyqrearff, juvpu lr fnj ol gur jnl bs gur zbhagnva bs
gur Nzbevgrf, nf gur YBEQ bhe Tbq pbzznaqrq hf; naq jr pnzr gb
Xnqrfuonearn.

1:20 Naq V fnvq hagb lbh, Lr ner pbzr hagb gur zbhagnva bs gur
Nzbevgrf, juvpu gur YBEQ bhe Tbq qbgu tvir hagb hf.

1:21 Orubyq, gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu frg gur ynaq orsber gurr: tb hc naq
cbffrff vg, nf gur YBEQ Tbq bs gul snguref ungu fnvq hagb gurr; srne
abg, arvgure or qvfpbhentrq.

1:22 Naq lr pnzr arne hagb zr rirel bar bs lbh, naq fnvq, Jr jvyy fraq
zra orsber hf, naq gurl funyy frnepu hf bhg gur ynaq, naq oevat hf
jbeq ntnva ol jung jnl jr zhfg tb hc, naq vagb jung pvgvrf jr funyy
pbzr.

1:23 Naq gur fnlvat cyrnfrq zr jryy: naq V gbbx gjryir zra bs lbh, bar
bs n gevor: 1:24 Naq gurl ghearq naq jrag hc vagb gur zbhagnva, naq
pnzr hagb gur inyyrl bs Rfupby, naq frnepurq vg bhg.

1:25 Naq gurl gbbx bs gur sehvg bs gur ynaq va gurve unaqf, naq
oebhtug vg qbja hagb hf, naq oebhtug hf jbeq ntnva, naq fnvq, Vg vf n
tbbq ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ bhe Tbq qbgu tvir hf.

1:26 Abgjvgufgnaqvat lr jbhyq abg tb hc, ohg eroryyrq ntnvafg gur
pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq: 1:27 Naq lr zhezherq va lbhe gragf,
naq fnvq, Orpnhfr gur YBEQ ungrq hf, ur ungu oebhtug hf sbegu bhg bs
gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, gb qryvire hf vagb gur unaq bs gur Nzbevgrf, gb
qrfgebl hf.

1:28 Juvgure funyy jr tb hc? bhe oerguera unir qvfpbhentrq bhe urneg,
fnlvat, Gur crbcyr vf terngre naq gnyyre guna jr; gur pvgvrf ner terng
naq jnyyrq hc gb urnira; naq zberbire jr unir frra gur fbaf bs gur
Nanxvzf gurer.

1:29 Gura V fnvq hagb lbh, Qernq abg, arvgure or nsenvq bs gurz.

1:30 Gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq juvpu tbrgu orsber lbh, ur funyy svtug sbe lbh,
nppbeqvat gb nyy gung ur qvq sbe lbh va Rtlcg orsber lbhe rlrf; 1:31
Naq va gur jvyqrearff, jurer gubh unfg frra ubj gung gur YBEQ gul Tbq
oner gurr, nf n zna qbgu orne uvf fba, va nyy gur jnl gung lr jrag,
hagvy lr pnzr vagb guvf cynpr.

1:32 Lrg va guvf guvat lr qvq abg oryvrir gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, 1:33 Jub
jrag va gur jnl orsber lbh, gb frnepu lbh bhg n cynpr gb cvgpu lbhe
gragf va, va sver ol avtug, gb furj lbh ol jung jnl lr fubhyq tb, naq
va n pybhq ol qnl.

1:34 Naq gur YBEQ urneq gur ibvpr bs lbhe jbeqf, naq jnf jebgu, naq
fjner, fnlvat, 1:35 Fheryl gurer funyy abg bar bs gurfr zra bs guvf
rivy trarengvba frr gung tbbq ynaq, juvpu V fjner gb tvir hagb lbhe
snguref.

1:36 Fnir Pnyro gur fba bs Wrcuhaaru; ur funyy frr vg, naq gb uvz jvyy
V tvir gur ynaq gung ur ungu gebqqra hcba, naq gb uvf puvyqera,
orpnhfr ur ungu jubyyl sbyybjrq gur YBEQ.

1:37 Nyfb gur YBEQ jnf natel jvgu zr sbe lbhe fnxrf, fnlvat, Gubh nyfb
funyg abg tb va guvgure.

1:38 Ohg Wbfuhn gur fba bs Aha, juvpu fgnaqrgu orsber gurr, ur funyy
tb va guvgure: rapbhentr uvz: sbe ur funyy pnhfr Vfenry gb vaurevg vg.

1:39 Zberbire lbhe yvggyr barf, juvpu lr fnvq fubhyq or n cerl, naq
lbhe puvyqera, juvpu va gung qnl unq ab xabjyrqtr orgjrra tbbq naq
rivy, gurl funyy tb va guvgure, naq hagb gurz jvyy V tvir vg, naq gurl
funyy cbffrff vg.

1:40 Ohg nf sbe lbh, ghea lbh, naq gnxr lbhe wbhearl vagb gur
jvyqrearff ol gur jnl bs gur Erq frn.

1:41 Gura lr nafjrerq naq fnvq hagb zr, Jr unir fvaarq ntnvafg gur
YBEQ, jr jvyy tb hc naq svtug, nppbeqvat gb nyy gung gur YBEQ bhe Tbq
pbzznaqrq hf.

Naq jura lr unq tveqrq ba rirel zna uvf jrncbaf bs jne, lr jrer ernql
gb tb hc vagb gur uvyy.

1:42 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb zr, Fnl hagb gurz. Tb abg hc, arvgure
svtug; sbe V nz abg nzbat lbh; yrfg lr or fzvggra orsber lbhe rarzvrf.

1:43 Fb V fcnxr hagb lbh; naq lr jbhyq abg urne, ohg eroryyrq ntnvafg
gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ, naq jrag cerfhzcghbhfyl hc vagb gur uvyy.

1:44 Naq gur Nzbevgrf, juvpu qjryg va gung zbhagnva, pnzr bhg ntnvafg
lbh, naq punfrq lbh, nf orrf qb, naq qrfgeblrq lbh va Frve, rira hagb
Ubeznu.

1:45 Naq lr erghearq naq jrcg orsber gur YBEQ; ohg gur YBEQ jbhyq abg
urnexra gb lbhe ibvpr, abe tvir rne hagb lbh.

1:46 Fb lr nobqr va Xnqrfu znal qnlf, nppbeqvat hagb gur qnlf gung lr
nobqr gurer.

2:1 Gura jr ghearq, naq gbbx bhe wbhearl vagb gur jvyqrearff ol gur
jnl bs gur Erq frn, nf gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb zr: naq jr pbzcnffrq zbhag
Frve znal qnlf.

2:2 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb zr, fnlvat, 2:3 Lr unir pbzcnffrq guvf
zbhagnva ybat rabhtu: ghea lbh abegujneq.

2:4 Naq pbzznaq gubh gur crbcyr, fnlvat, Lr ner gb cnff guebhtu gur
pbnfg bs lbhe oerguera gur puvyqera bs Rfnh, juvpu qjryy va Frve; naq
gurl funyy or nsenvq bs lbh: gnxr lr tbbq urrq hagb lbhefryirf
gurersber: 2:5 Zrqqyr abg jvgu gurz; sbe V jvyy abg tvir lbh bs gurve
ynaq, ab, abg fb zhpu nf n sbbg oernqgu; orpnhfr V unir tvira zbhag
Frve hagb Rfnh sbe n cbffrffvba.

2:6 Lr funyy ohl zrng bs gurz sbe zbarl, gung lr znl rng; naq lr funyy
nyfb ohl jngre bs gurz sbe zbarl, gung lr znl qevax.

2:7 Sbe gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu oyrffrq gurr va nyy gur jbexf bs gul
unaq: ur xabjrgu gul jnyxvat guebhtu guvf terng jvyqrearff: gurfr
sbegl lrnef gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu orra jvgu gurr; gubh unfg ynpxrq
abguvat.

2:8 Naq jura jr cnffrq ol sebz bhe oerguera gur puvyqera bs Rfnh,
juvpu qjryg va Frve, guebhtu gur jnl bs gur cynva sebz Ryngu, naq sebz
Rmvbatnore, jr ghearq naq cnffrq ol gur jnl bs gur jvyqrearff bs Zbno.

2:9 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb zr, Qvfgerff abg gur Zbnovgrf, arvgure
pbagraq jvgu gurz va onggyr: sbe V jvyy abg tvir gurr bs gurve ynaq
sbe n cbffrffvba; orpnhfr V unir tvira Ne hagb gur puvyqera bs Ybg sbe
n cbffrffvba.

2:10 Gur Rzvzf qjryg gurerva va gvzrf cnfg, n crbcyr terng, naq znal,
naq gnyy, nf gur Nanxvzf; 2:11 Juvpu nyfb jrer nppbhagrq tvnagf, nf
gur Nanxvzf; ohg gur Zbnovgrf pnyyrq gurz Rzvzf.

2:12 Gur Ubevzf nyfb qjryg va Frve orsbergvzr; ohg gur puvyqera bs
Rfnh fhpprrqrq gurz, jura gurl unq qrfgeblrq gurz sebz orsber gurz,
naq qjryg va gurve fgrnq; nf Vfenry qvq hagb gur ynaq bs uvf
cbffrffvba, juvpu gur YBEQ tnir hagb gurz.

2:13 Abj evfr hc, fnvq V, naq trg lbh bire gur oebbx Mrerq. Naq jr
jrag bire gur oebbx Mrerq.

2:14 Naq gur fcnpr va juvpu jr pnzr sebz Xnqrfuonearn, hagvy jr jrer
pbzr bire gur oebbx Mrerq, jnf guvegl naq rvtug lrnef; hagvy nyy gur
trarengvba bs gur zra bs jne jrer jnfgrq bhg sebz nzbat gur ubfg, nf
gur YBEQ fjner hagb gurz.

2:15 Sbe vaqrrq gur unaq bs gur YBEQ jnf ntnvafg gurz, gb qrfgebl gurz
sebz nzbat gur ubfg, hagvy gurl jrer pbafhzrq.

2:16 Fb vg pnzr gb cnff, jura nyy gur zra bs jne jrer pbafhzrq naq
qrnq sebz nzbat gur crbcyr, 2:17 Gung gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb zr, fnlvat,
2:18 Gubh neg gb cnff bire guebhtu Ne, gur pbnfg bs Zbno, guvf qnl:
2:19 Naq jura gubh pbzrfg avtu bire ntnvafg gur puvyqera bs Nzzba,
qvfgerff gurz abg, abe zrqqyr jvgu gurz: sbe V jvyy abg tvir gurr bs
gur ynaq bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba nal cbffrffvba; orpnhfr V unir tvira
vg hagb gur puvyqera bs Ybg sbe n cbffrffvba.

2:20 (Gung nyfb jnf nppbhagrq n ynaq bs tvnagf: tvnagf qjryg gurerva
va byq gvzr; naq gur Nzzbavgrf pnyy gurz Mnzmhzzvzf; 2:21 N crbcyr
terng, naq znal, naq gnyy, nf gur Nanxvzf; ohg gur YBEQ qrfgeblrq gurz
orsber gurz; naq gurl fhpprrqrq gurz, naq qjryg va gurve fgrnq: 2:22
Nf ur qvq gb gur puvyqera bs Rfnh, juvpu qjryg va Frve, jura ur
qrfgeblrq gur Ubevzf sebz orsber gurz; naq gurl fhpprrqrq gurz, naq
qjryg va gurve fgrnq rira hagb guvf qnl: 2:23 Naq gur Nivzf juvpu
qjryg va Unmrevz, rira hagb Nmmnu, gur Pncugbevzf, juvpu pnzr sbegu
bhg bs Pncugbe, qrfgeblrq gurz, naq qjryg va gurve fgrnq.)  2:24 Evfr
lr hc, gnxr lbhe wbhearl, naq cnff bire gur evire Neaba: orubyq, V
unir tvira vagb guvar unaq Fvuba gur Nzbevgr, xvat bs Urfuoba, naq uvf
ynaq: ortva gb cbffrff vg, naq pbagraq jvgu uvz va onggyr.

2:25 Guvf qnl jvyy V ortva gb chg gur qernq bs gurr naq gur srne bs
gurr hcba gur angvbaf gung ner haqre gur jubyr urnira, jub funyy urne
ercbeg bs gurr, naq funyy gerzoyr, naq or va nathvfu orpnhfr bs gurr.

2:26 Naq V frag zrffratref bhg bs gur jvyqrearff bs Xrqrzbgu hagb
Fvuba xvat bs Urfuoba jvgu jbeqf bs crnpr, fnlvat, 2:27 Yrg zr cnff
guebhtu gul ynaq: V jvyy tb nybat ol gur uvtu jnl, V jvyy arvgure ghea
hagb gur evtug unaq abe gb gur yrsg.

2:28 Gubh funyg fryy zr zrng sbe zbarl, gung V znl rng; naq tvir zr
jngre sbe zbarl, gung V znl qevax: bayl V jvyy cnff guebhtu ba zl
srrg; 2:29 (Nf gur puvyqera bs Rfnh juvpu qjryy va Frve, naq gur
Zbnovgrf juvpu qjryy va Ne, qvq hagb zr;) hagvy V funyy cnff bire
Wbeqna vagb gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ bhe Tbq tvirgu hf.

2:30 Ohg Fvuba xvat bs Urfuoba jbhyq abg yrg hf cnff ol uvz: sbe gur
YBEQ gul Tbq uneqrarq uvf fcvevg, naq znqr uvf urneg bofgvangr, gung
ur zvtug qryvire uvz vagb gul unaq, nf nccrnergu guvf qnl.

2:31 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb zr, Orubyq, V unir ortha gb tvir Fvuba naq
uvf ynaq orsber gurr: ortva gb cbffrff, gung gubh znlrfg vaurevg uvf
ynaq.

2:32 Gura Fvuba pnzr bhg ntnvafg hf, ur naq nyy uvf crbcyr, gb svtug
ng Wnunm.

2:33 Naq gur YBEQ bhe Tbq qryvirerq uvz orsber hf; naq jr fzbgr uvz,
naq uvf fbaf, naq nyy uvf crbcyr.

2:34 Naq jr gbbx nyy uvf pvgvrf ng gung gvzr, naq hggreyl qrfgeblrq
gur zra, naq gur jbzra, naq gur yvggyr barf, bs rirel pvgl, jr yrsg
abar gb erznva: 2:35 Bayl gur pnggyr jr gbbx sbe n cerl hagb
bhefryirf, naq gur fcbvy bs gur pvgvrf juvpu jr gbbx.

2:36 Sebz Nebre, juvpu vf ol gur oevax bs gur evire bs Neaba, naq sebz
gur pvgl gung vf ol gur evire, rira hagb Tvyrnq, gurer jnf abg bar
pvgl gbb fgebat sbe hf: gur YBEQ bhe Tbq qryvirerq nyy hagb hf: 2:37
Bayl hagb gur ynaq bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba gubh pnzrfg abg, abe hagb
nal cynpr bs gur evire Wnoobx, abe hagb gur pvgvrf va gur zbhagnvaf,
abe hagb jungfbrire gur YBEQ bhe Tbq sbeonq hf.

3:1 Gura jr ghearq, naq jrag hc gur jnl gb Onfuna: naq Bt gur xvat bs
Onfuna pnzr bhg ntnvafg hf, ur naq nyy uvf crbcyr, gb onggyr ng Rqerv.

3:2 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb zr, Srne uvz abg: sbe V jvyy qryvire uvz,
naq nyy uvf crbcyr, naq uvf ynaq, vagb gul unaq; naq gubh funyg qb
hagb uvz nf gubh qvqfg hagb Fvuba xvat bs gur Nzbevgrf, juvpu qjryg ng
Urfuoba.

3:3 Fb gur YBEQ bhe Tbq qryvirerq vagb bhe unaqf Bt nyfb, gur xvat bs
Onfuna, naq nyy uvf crbcyr: naq jr fzbgr uvz hagvy abar jnf yrsg gb
uvz erznvavat.

3:4 Naq jr gbbx nyy uvf pvgvrf ng gung gvzr, gurer jnf abg n pvgl
juvpu jr gbbx abg sebz gurz, guerrfpber pvgvrf, nyy gur ertvba bs
Netbo, gur xvatqbz bs Bt va Onfuna.

3:5 Nyy gurfr pvgvrf jrer sraprq jvgu uvtu jnyyf, tngrf, naq onef;
orfvqr hajnyyrq gbjaf n terng znal.

3:6 Naq jr hggreyl qrfgeblrq gurz, nf jr qvq hagb Fvuba xvat bs
Urfuoba, hggreyl qrfgeblvat gur zra, jbzra, naq puvyqera, bs rirel
pvgl.

3:7 Ohg nyy gur pnggyr, naq gur fcbvy bs gur pvgvrf, jr gbbx sbe n
cerl gb bhefryirf.

3:8 Naq jr gbbx ng gung gvzr bhg bs gur unaq bs gur gjb xvatf bs gur
Nzbevgrf gur ynaq gung jnf ba guvf fvqr Wbeqna, sebz gur evire bs
Neaba hagb zbhag Urezba; 3:9 (Juvpu Urezba gur Fvqbavnaf pnyy Fvevba;
naq gur Nzbevgrf pnyy vg Furave;) 3:10 Nyy gur pvgvrf bs gur cynva,
naq nyy Tvyrnq, naq nyy Onfuna, hagb Fnypunu naq Rqerv, pvgvrf bs gur
xvatqbz bs Bt va Onfuna.

3:11 Sbe bayl Bt xvat bs Onfuna erznvarq bs gur erzanag bs tvnagf;
orubyq uvf orqfgrnq jnf n orqfgrnq bs veba; vf vg abg va Enoongu bs
gur puvyqera bs Nzzba? avar phovgf jnf gur yratgu gurerbs, naq sbhe
phovgf gur oernqgu bs vg, nsgre gur phovg bs n zna.

3:12 Naq guvf ynaq, juvpu jr cbffrffrq ng gung gvzr, sebz Nebre, juvpu
vf ol gur evire Neaba, naq unys zbhag Tvyrnq, naq gur pvgvrf gurerbs,
tnir V hagb gur Erhoravgrf naq gb gur Tnqvgrf.

3:13 Naq gur erfg bs Tvyrnq, naq nyy Onfuna, orvat gur xvatqbz bs Bt,
tnir V hagb gur unys gevor bs Znanffru; nyy gur ertvba bs Netbo, jvgu
nyy Onfuna, juvpu jnf pnyyrq gur ynaq bs tvnagf.

3:14 Wnve gur fba bs Znanffru gbbx nyy gur pbhagel bs Netbo hagb gur
pbnfgf bs Trfuhev naq Znnpunguv; naq pnyyrq gurz nsgre uvf bja anzr,
Onfunaunibguwnve, hagb guvf qnl.

3:15 Naq V tnir Tvyrnq hagb Znpuve.

3:16 Naq hagb gur Erhoravgrf naq hagb gur Tnqvgrf V tnir sebz Tvyrnq
rira hagb gur evire Neaba unys gur inyyrl, naq gur obeqre rira hagb
gur evire Wnoobx, juvpu vf gur obeqre bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba; 3:17
Gur cynva nyfb, naq Wbeqna, naq gur pbnfg gurerbs, sebz Puvaarergu
rira hagb gur frn bs gur cynva, rira gur fnyg frn, haqre Nfuqbgucvftnu
rnfgjneq.

3:18 Naq V pbzznaqrq lbh ng gung gvzr, fnlvat, Gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq ungu
tvira lbh guvf ynaq gb cbffrff vg: lr funyy cnff bire nezrq orsber
lbhe oerguera gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, nyy gung ner zrrg sbe gur jne.

3:19 Ohg lbhe jvirf, naq lbhe yvggyr barf, naq lbhe pnggyr, (sbe V
xabj gung lr unir zhpu pnggyr,) funyy novqr va lbhe pvgvrf juvpu V
unir tvira lbh; 3:20 Hagvy gur YBEQ unir tvira erfg hagb lbhe
oerguera, nf jryy nf hagb lbh, naq hagvy gurl nyfb cbffrff gur ynaq
juvpu gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq ungu tvira gurz orlbaq Wbeqna: naq gura funyy
lr erghea rirel zna hagb uvf cbffrffvba, juvpu V unir tvira lbh.

3:21 Naq V pbzznaqrq Wbfuhn ng gung gvzr, fnlvat, Guvar rlrf unir frra
nyy gung gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq ungu qbar hagb gurfr gjb xvatf: fb funyy
gur YBEQ qb hagb nyy gur xvatqbzf juvgure gubh cnffrfg.

3:22 Lr funyy abg srne gurz: sbe gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq ur funyy svtug sbe
lbh.

3:23 Naq V orfbhtug gur YBEQ ng gung gvzr, fnlvat, 3:24 B Ybeq TBQ,
gubh unfg ortha gb furj gul freinag gul terngarff, naq gul zvtugl
unaq: sbe jung Tbq vf gurer va urnira be va rnegu, gung pna qb
nppbeqvat gb gul jbexf, naq nppbeqvat gb gul zvtug?  3:25 V cenl gurr,
yrg zr tb bire, naq frr gur tbbq ynaq gung vf orlbaq Wbeqna, gung
tbbqyl zbhagnva, naq Yronaba.

3:26 Ohg gur YBEQ jnf jebgu jvgu zr sbe lbhe fnxrf, naq jbhyq abg urne
zr: naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb zr, Yrg vg fhssvpr gurr; fcrnx ab zber hagb
zr bs guvf znggre.

3:27 Trg gurr hc vagb gur gbc bs Cvftnu, naq yvsg hc guvar rlrf
jrfgjneq, naq abegujneq, naq fbhgujneq, naq rnfgjneq, naq orubyq vg
jvgu guvar rlrf: sbe gubh funyg abg tb bire guvf Wbeqna.

3:28 Ohg punetr Wbfuhn, naq rapbhentr uvz, naq fgeratgura uvz: sbe ur
funyy tb bire orsber guvf crbcyr, naq ur funyy pnhfr gurz gb vaurevg
gur ynaq juvpu gubh funyg frr.

3:29 Fb jr nobqr va gur inyyrl bire ntnvafg Orgucrbe.

4:1 Abj gurersber urnexra, B Vfenry, hagb gur fgnghgrf naq hagb gur
whqtzragf, juvpu V grnpu lbh, sbe gb qb gurz, gung lr znl yvir, naq tb
va naq cbffrff gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ Tbq bs lbhe snguref tvirgu lbh.

4:2 Lr funyy abg nqq hagb gur jbeq juvpu V pbzznaq lbh, arvgure funyy
lr qvzvavfu bhtug sebz vg, gung lr znl xrrc gur pbzznaqzragf bs gur
YBEQ lbhe Tbq juvpu V pbzznaq lbh.

4:3 Lbhe rlrf unir frra jung gur YBEQ qvq orpnhfr bs Onnycrbe: sbe nyy
gur zra gung sbyybjrq Onnycrbe, gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu qrfgeblrq gurz
sebz nzbat lbh.

4:4 Ohg lr gung qvq pyrnir hagb gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq ner nyvir rirel bar
bs lbh guvf qnl.

4:5 Orubyq, V unir gnhtug lbh fgnghgrf naq whqtzragf, rira nf gur YBEQ
zl Tbq pbzznaqrq zr, gung lr fubhyq qb fb va gur ynaq juvgure lr tb gb
cbffrff vg.

4:6 Xrrc gurersber naq qb gurz; sbe guvf vf lbhe jvfqbz naq lbhe
haqrefgnaqvat va gur fvtug bs gur angvbaf, juvpu funyy urne nyy gurfr
fgnghgrf, naq fnl, Fheryl guvf terng angvba vf n jvfr naq
haqrefgnaqvat crbcyr.

4:7 Sbe jung angvba vf gurer fb terng, jub ungu Tbq fb avtu hagb gurz,
nf gur YBEQ bhe Tbq vf va nyy guvatf gung jr pnyy hcba uvz sbe?  4:8
Naq jung angvba vf gurer fb terng, gung ungu fgnghgrf naq whqtzragf fb
evtugrbhf nf nyy guvf ynj, juvpu V frg orsber lbh guvf qnl?  4:9 Bayl
gnxr urrq gb gulfrys, naq xrrc gul fbhy qvyvtragyl, yrfg gubh sbetrg
gur guvatf juvpu guvar rlrf unir frra, naq yrfg gurl qrcneg sebz gul
urneg nyy gur qnlf bs gul yvsr: ohg grnpu gurz gul fbaf, naq gul fbaf'
fbaf; 4:10 Fcrpvnyyl gur qnl gung gubh fgbbqrfg orsber gur YBEQ gul
Tbq va Ubero, jura gur YBEQ fnvq hagb zr, Tngure zr gur crbcyr
gbtrgure, naq V jvyy znxr gurz urne zl jbeqf, gung gurl znl yrnea gb
srne zr nyy gur qnlf gung gurl funyy yvir hcba gur rnegu, naq gung
gurl znl grnpu gurve puvyqera.

4:11 Naq lr pnzr arne naq fgbbq haqre gur zbhagnva; naq gur zbhagnva
ohearq jvgu sver hagb gur zvqfg bs urnira, jvgu qnexarff, pybhqf, naq
guvpx qnexarff.

4:12 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb lbh bhg bs gur zvqfg bs gur sver: lr
urneq gur ibvpr bs gur jbeqf, ohg fnj ab fvzvyvghqr; bayl lr urneq n
ibvpr.

4:13 Naq ur qrpynerq hagb lbh uvf pbiranag, juvpu ur pbzznaqrq lbh gb
cresbez, rira gra pbzznaqzragf; naq ur jebgr gurz hcba gjb gnoyrf bs
fgbar.

4:14 Naq gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq zr ng gung gvzr gb grnpu lbh fgnghgrf naq
whqtzragf, gung lr zvtug qb gurz va gur ynaq juvgure lr tb bire gb
cbffrff vg.

4:15 Gnxr lr gurersber tbbq urrq hagb lbhefryirf; sbe lr fnj ab znaare
bs fvzvyvghqr ba gur qnl gung gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb lbh va Ubero bhg bs
gur zvqfg bs gur sver: 4:16 Yrfg lr pbeehcg lbhefryirf, naq znxr lbh n
tenira vzntr, gur fvzvyvghqr bs nal svther, gur yvxrarff bs znyr be
srznyr, 4:17 Gur yvxrarff bs nal ornfg gung vf ba gur rnegu, gur
yvxrarff bs nal jvatrq sbjy gung syvrgu va gur nve, 4:18 Gur yvxrarff
bs nal guvat gung perrcrgu ba gur tebhaq, gur yvxrarff bs nal svfu
gung vf va gur jngref orarngu gur rnegu: 4:19 Naq yrfg gubh yvsg hc
guvar rlrf hagb urnira, naq jura gubh frrfg gur fha, naq gur zbba, naq
gur fgnef, rira nyy gur ubfg bs urnira, fubhyqrfg or qevira gb jbefuvc
gurz, naq freir gurz, juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu qvivqrq hagb nyy
angvbaf haqre gur jubyr urnira.

4:20 Ohg gur YBEQ ungu gnxra lbh, naq oebhtug lbh sbegu bhg bs gur
veba sheanpr, rira bhg bs Rtlcg, gb or hagb uvz n crbcyr bs
vaurevgnapr, nf lr ner guvf qnl.

4:21 Shegurezber gur YBEQ jnf natel jvgu zr sbe lbhe fnxrf, naq fjner
gung V fubhyq abg tb bire Wbeqna, naq gung V fubhyq abg tb va hagb
gung tbbq ynaq, juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu gurr sbe na vaurevgnapr:
4:22 Ohg V zhfg qvr va guvf ynaq, V zhfg abg tb bire Wbeqna: ohg lr
funyy tb bire, naq cbffrff gung tbbq ynaq.

4:23 Gnxr urrq hagb lbhefryirf, yrfg lr sbetrg gur pbiranag bs gur
YBEQ lbhe Tbq, juvpu ur znqr jvgu lbh, naq znxr lbh n tenira vzntr, be
gur yvxrarff bs nal guvat, juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu sbeovqqra gurr.

4:24 Sbe gur YBEQ gul Tbq vf n pbafhzvat sver, rira n wrnybhf Tbq.

4:25 Jura gubh funyg ortrg puvyqera, naq puvyqera'f puvyqera, naq lr
funyy unir erznvarq ybat va gur ynaq, naq funyy pbeehcg lbhefryirf,
naq znxr n tenira vzntr, be gur yvxrarff bs nal guvat, naq funyy qb
rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq, gb cebibxr uvz gb natre: 4:26 V
pnyy urnira naq rnegu gb jvgarff ntnvafg lbh guvf qnl, gung lr funyy
fbba hggreyl crevfu sebz bss gur ynaq jurerhagb lr tb bire Wbeqna gb
cbffrff vg; lr funyy abg cebybat lbhe qnlf hcba vg, ohg funyy hggreyl
or qrfgeblrq.

4:27 Naq gur YBEQ funyy fpnggre lbh nzbat gur angvbaf, naq lr funyy or
yrsg srj va ahzore nzbat gur urngura, juvgure gur YBEQ funyy yrnq lbh.

4:28 Naq gurer lr funyy freir tbqf, gur jbex bs zra'f unaqf, jbbq naq
fgbar, juvpu arvgure frr, abe urne, abe rng, abe fzryy.

4:29 Ohg vs sebz gurapr gubh funyg frrx gur YBEQ gul Tbq, gubh funyg
svaq uvz, vs gubh frrx uvz jvgu nyy gul urneg naq jvgu nyy gul fbhy.

4:30 Jura gubh neg va gevohyngvba, naq nyy gurfr guvatf ner pbzr hcba
gurr, rira va gur ynggre qnlf, vs gubh ghea gb gur YBEQ gul Tbq, naq
funyg or borqvrag hagb uvf ibvpr; 4:31 (Sbe gur YBEQ gul Tbq vf n
zrepvshy Tbq;) ur jvyy abg sbefnxr gurr, arvgure qrfgebl gurr, abe
sbetrg gur pbiranag bs gul snguref juvpu ur fjner hagb gurz.

4:32 Sbe nfx abj bs gur qnlf gung ner cnfg, juvpu jrer orsber gurr,
fvapr gur qnl gung Tbq perngrq zna hcba gur rnegu, naq nfx sebz gur
bar fvqr bs urnira hagb gur bgure, jurgure gurer ungu orra nal fhpu
guvat nf guvf terng guvat vf, be ungu orra urneq yvxr vg?  4:33 Qvq
rire crbcyr urne gur ibvpr bs Tbq fcrnxvat bhg bs gur zvqfg bs gur
sver, nf gubh unfg urneq, naq yvir?  4:34 Be ungu Tbq nffnlrq gb tb
naq gnxr uvz n angvba sebz gur zvqfg bs nabgure angvba, ol
grzcgngvbaf, ol fvtaf, naq ol jbaqref, naq ol jne, naq ol n zvtugl
unaq, naq ol n fgergpurq bhg nez, naq ol terng greebef, nppbeqvat gb
nyy gung gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq qvq sbe lbh va Rtlcg orsber lbhe rlrf?
4:35 Hagb gurr vg jnf furjrq, gung gubh zvtugrfg xabj gung gur YBEQ ur
vf Tbq; gurer vf abar ryfr orfvqr uvz.

4:36 Bhg bs urnira ur znqr gurr gb urne uvf ibvpr, gung ur zvtug
vafgehpg gurr: naq hcba rnegu ur furjrq gurr uvf terng sver; naq gubh
urneqrfg uvf jbeqf bhg bs gur zvqfg bs gur sver.

4:37 Naq orpnhfr ur ybirq gul snguref, gurersber ur pubfr gurve frrq
nsgre gurz, naq oebhtug gurr bhg va uvf fvtug jvgu uvf zvtugl cbjre
bhg bs Rtlcg; 4:38 Gb qevir bhg angvbaf sebz orsber gurr terngre naq
zvtugvre guna gubh neg, gb oevat gurr va, gb tvir gurr gurve ynaq sbe
na vaurevgnapr, nf vg vf guvf qnl.

4:39 Xabj gurersber guvf qnl, naq pbafvqre vg va guvar urneg, gung gur
YBEQ ur vf Tbq va urnira nobir, naq hcba gur rnegu orarngu: gurer vf
abar ryfr.

4:40 Gubh funyg xrrc gurersber uvf fgnghgrf, naq uvf pbzznaqzragf,
juvpu V pbzznaq gurr guvf qnl, gung vg znl tb jryy jvgu gurr, naq jvgu
gul puvyqera nsgre gurr, naq gung gubh znlrfg cebybat gul qnlf hcba
gur rnegu, juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu gurr, sbe rire.

4:41 Gura Zbfrf frirerq guerr pvgvrf ba guvf fvqr Wbeqna gbjneq gur
fhaevfvat; 4:42 Gung gur fynlre zvtug syrr guvgure, juvpu fubhyq xvyy
uvf arvtuobhe hanjnerf, naq ungrq uvz abg va gvzrf cnfg; naq gung
syrrvat hagb bar bs gurfr pvgvrf ur zvtug yvir: 4:43 Anzryl, Ormre va
gur jvyqrearff, va gur cynva pbhagel, bs gur Erhoravgrf; naq Enzbgu va
Tvyrnq, bs gur Tnqvgrf; naq Tbyna va Onfuna, bs gur Znanffvgrf.

4:44 Naq guvf vf gur ynj juvpu Zbfrf frg orsber gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry: 4:45 Gurfr ner gur grfgvzbavrf, naq gur fgnghgrf, naq gur
whqtzragf, juvpu Zbfrf fcnxr hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, nsgre gurl
pnzr sbegu bhg bs Rtlcg.

4:46 Ba guvf fvqr Wbeqna, va gur inyyrl bire ntnvafg Orgucrbe, va gur
ynaq bs Fvuba xvat bs gur Nzbevgrf, jub qjryg ng Urfuoba, jubz Zbfrf
naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry fzbgr, nsgre gurl jrer pbzr sbegu bhg bs
Rtlcg: 4:47 Naq gurl cbffrffrq uvf ynaq, naq gur ynaq bs Bt xvat bs
Onfuna, gjb xvatf bs gur Nzbevgrf, juvpu jrer ba guvf fvqr Wbeqna
gbjneq gur fhaevfvat; 4:48 Sebz Nebre, juvpu vf ol gur onax bs gur
evire Neaba, rira hagb zbhag Fvba, juvpu vf Urezba, 4:49 Naq nyy gur
cynva ba guvf fvqr Wbeqna rnfgjneq, rira hagb gur frn bs gur cynva,
haqre gur fcevatf bs Cvftnu.

5:1 Naq Zbfrf pnyyrq nyy Vfenry, naq fnvq hagb gurz, Urne, B Vfenry,
gur fgnghgrf naq whqtzragf juvpu V fcrnx va lbhe rnef guvf qnl, gung
lr znl yrnea gurz, naq xrrc, naq qb gurz.

5:2 Gur YBEQ bhe Tbq znqr n pbiranag jvgu hf va Ubero.

5:3 Gur YBEQ znqr abg guvf pbiranag jvgu bhe snguref, ohg jvgu hf,
rira hf, jub ner nyy bs hf urer nyvir guvf qnl.

5:4 Gur YBEQ gnyxrq jvgu lbh snpr gb snpr va gur zbhag bhg bs gur
zvqfg bs gur sver, 5:5 (V fgbbq orgjrra gur YBEQ naq lbh ng gung gvzr,
gb furj lbh gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ: sbe lr jrer nsenvq ol ernfba bs gur
sver, naq jrag abg hc vagb gur zbhag;) fnlvat, 5:6 V nz gur YBEQ gul
Tbq, juvpu oebhtug gurr bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, sebz gur ubhfr bs
obaqntr.

5:7 Gubh funyg unir abar bgure tbqf orsber zr.

5:8 Gubh funyg abg znxr gurr nal tenira vzntr, be nal yvxrarff bs nal
guvat gung vf va urnira nobir, be gung vf va gur rnegu orarngu, be
gung vf va gur jngref orarngu gur rnegu: 5:9 Gubh funyg abg obj qbja
gulfrys hagb gurz, abe freir gurz: sbe V gur YBEQ gul Tbq nz n wrnybhf
Tbq, ivfvgvat gur vavdhvgl bs gur snguref hcba gur puvyqera hagb gur
guveq naq sbhegu trarengvba bs gurz gung ungr zr, 5:10 Naq furjvat
zrepl hagb gubhfnaqf bs gurz gung ybir zr naq xrrc zl pbzznaqzragf.

5:11 Gubh funyg abg gnxr gur anzr bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq va inva: sbe gur
YBEQ jvyy abg ubyq uvz thvygyrff gung gnxrgu uvf anzr va inva.

5:12 Xrrc gur fnoongu qnl gb fnapgvsl vg, nf gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu
pbzznaqrq gurr.

5:13 Fvk qnlf gubh funyg ynobhe, naq qb nyy gul jbex: 5:14 Ohg gur
friragu qnl vf gur fnoongu bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq: va vg gubh funyg abg
qb nal jbex, gubh, abe gul fba, abe gul qnhtugre, abe gul znafreinag,
abe gul znvqfreinag, abe guvar bk, abe guvar nff, abe nal bs gul
pnggyr, abe gul fgenatre gung vf jvguva gul tngrf; gung gul znafreinag
naq gul znvqfreinag znl erfg nf jryy nf gubh.

5:15 Naq erzrzore gung gubh jnfg n freinag va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, naq
gung gur YBEQ gul Tbq oebhtug gurr bhg gurapr guebhtu n zvtugl unaq
naq ol n fgergpurq bhg nez: gurersber gur YBEQ gul Tbq pbzznaqrq gurr
gb xrrc gur fnoongu qnl.

5:16 Ubabhe gul sngure naq gul zbgure, nf gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu
pbzznaqrq gurr; gung gul qnlf znl or cebybatrq, naq gung vg znl tb
jryy jvgu gurr, va gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu gurr.

5:17 Gubh funyg abg xvyy.

5:18 Arvgure funyg gubh pbzzvg nqhygrel.

5:19 Arvgure funyg gubh fgrny.

5:20 Arvgure funyg gubh orne snyfr jvgarff ntnvafg gul arvtuobhe.

5:21 Arvgure funyg gubh qrfver gul arvtuobhe'f jvsr, arvgure funyg
gubh pbirg gul arvtuobhe'f ubhfr, uvf svryq, be uvf znafreinag, be uvf
znvqfreinag, uvf bk, be uvf nff, be nal guvat gung vf gul arvtuobhe'f.

5:22 Gurfr jbeqf gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb nyy lbhe nffrzoyl va gur zbhag
bhg bs gur zvqfg bs gur sver, bs gur pybhq, naq bs gur guvpx qnexarff,
jvgu n terng ibvpr: naq ur nqqrq ab zber. Naq ur jebgr gurz va gjb
gnoyrf bs fgbar, naq qryvirerq gurz hagb zr.

5:23 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura lr urneq gur ibvpr bhg bs gur zvqfg bs
gur qnexarff, (sbe gur zbhagnva qvq ohea jvgu sver,) gung lr pnzr arne
hagb zr, rira nyy gur urnqf bs lbhe gevorf, naq lbhe ryqref; 5:24 Naq
lr fnvq, Orubyq, gur YBEQ bhe Tbq ungu furjrq hf uvf tybel naq uvf
terngarff, naq jr unir urneq uvf ibvpr bhg bs gur zvqfg bs gur sver:
jr unir frra guvf qnl gung Tbq qbgu gnyx jvgu zna, naq ur yvirgu.

5:25 Abj gurersber jul fubhyq jr qvr? sbe guvf terng sver jvyy pbafhzr
hf: vs jr urne gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ bhe Tbq nal zber, gura jr funyy
qvr.

5:26 Sbe jub vf gurer bs nyy syrfu, gung ungu urneq gur ibvpr bs gur
yvivat Tbq fcrnxvat bhg bs gur zvqfg bs gur sver, nf jr unir, naq
yvirq?  5:27 Tb gubh arne, naq urne nyy gung gur YBEQ bhe Tbq funyy
fnl: naq fcrnx gubh hagb hf nyy gung gur YBEQ bhe Tbq funyy fcrnx hagb
gurr; naq jr jvyy urne vg, naq qb vg.

5:28 Naq gur YBEQ urneq gur ibvpr bs lbhe jbeqf, jura lr fcnxr hagb
zr; naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb zr, V unir urneq gur ibvpr bs gur jbeqf bs
guvf crbcyr, juvpu gurl unir fcbxra hagb gurr: gurl unir jryy fnvq nyy
gung gurl unir fcbxra.

5:29 B gung gurer jrer fhpu na urneg va gurz, gung gurl jbhyq srne zr,
naq xrrc nyy zl pbzznaqzragf nyjnlf, gung vg zvtug or jryy jvgu gurz,
naq jvgu gurve puvyqera sbe rire!  5:30 Tb fnl gb gurz, Trg lbh vagb
lbhe gragf ntnva.

5:31 Ohg nf sbe gurr, fgnaq gubh urer ol zr, naq V jvyy fcrnx hagb
gurr nyy gur pbzznaqzragf, naq gur fgnghgrf, naq gur whqtzragf, juvpu
gubh funyg grnpu gurz, gung gurl znl qb gurz va gur ynaq juvpu V tvir
gurz gb cbffrff vg.

5:32 Lr funyy bofreir gb qb gurersber nf gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq ungu
pbzznaqrq lbh: lr funyy abg ghea nfvqr gb gur evtug unaq be gb gur
yrsg.

5:33 Lr funyy jnyx va nyy gur jnlf juvpu gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq ungu
pbzznaqrq lbh, gung lr znl yvir, naq gung vg znl or jryy jvgu lbh, naq
gung lr znl cebybat lbhe qnlf va gur ynaq juvpu lr funyy cbffrff.

6:1 Abj gurfr ner gur pbzznaqzragf, gur fgnghgrf, naq gur whqtzragf,
juvpu gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq pbzznaqrq gb grnpu lbh, gung lr zvtug qb gurz
va gur ynaq juvgure lr tb gb cbffrff vg: 6:2 Gung gubh zvtugrfg srne
gur YBEQ gul Tbq, gb xrrc nyy uvf fgnghgrf naq uvf pbzznaqzragf, juvpu
V pbzznaq gurr, gubh, naq gul fba, naq gul fba'f fba, nyy gur qnlf bs
gul yvsr; naq gung gul qnlf znl or cebybatrq.

6:3 Urne gurersber, B Vfenry, naq bofreir gb qb vg; gung vg znl or
jryy jvgu gurr, naq gung lr znl vapernfr zvtugvyl, nf gur YBEQ Tbq bs
gul snguref ungu cebzvfrq gurr, va gur ynaq gung sybjrgu jvgu zvyx naq
ubarl.

6:4 Urne, B Vfenry: Gur YBEQ bhe Tbq vf bar YBEQ: 6:5 Naq gubh funyg
ybir gur YBEQ gul Tbq jvgu nyy guvar urneg, naq jvgu nyy gul fbhy, naq
jvgu nyy gul zvtug.

6:6 Naq gurfr jbeqf, juvpu V pbzznaq gurr guvf qnl, funyy or va guvar
urneg: 6:7 Naq gubh funyg grnpu gurz qvyvtragyl hagb gul puvyqera, naq
funyg gnyx bs gurz jura gubh fvggrfg va guvar ubhfr, naq jura gubh
jnyxrfg ol gur jnl, naq jura gubh yvrfg qbja, naq jura gubh evfrfg hc.

6:8 Naq gubh funyg ovaq gurz sbe n fvta hcba guvar unaq, naq gurl
funyy or nf sebagyrgf orgjrra guvar rlrf.

6:9 Naq gubh funyg jevgr gurz hcba gur cbfgf bs gul ubhfr, naq ba gul
tngrf.

6:10 Naq vg funyy or, jura gur YBEQ gul Tbq funyy unir oebhtug gurr
vagb gur ynaq juvpu ur fjner hagb gul snguref, gb Noenunz, gb Vfnnp,
naq gb Wnpbo, gb tvir gurr terng naq tbbqyl pvgvrf, juvpu gubh
ohvyqrqfg abg, 6:11 Naq ubhfrf shyy bs nyy tbbq guvatf, juvpu gubh
svyyrqfg abg, naq jryyf qvttrq, juvpu gubh qvttrqfg abg, ivarlneqf naq
byvir gerrf, juvpu gubh cynagrqfg abg; jura gubh funyg unir rngra naq
or shyy; 6:12 Gura orjner yrfg gubh sbetrg gur YBEQ, juvpu oebhtug
gurr sbegu bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, sebz gur ubhfr bs obaqntr.

6:13 Gubh funyg srne gur YBEQ gul Tbq, naq freir uvz, naq funyg fjrne
ol uvf anzr.

6:14 Lr funyy abg tb nsgre bgure tbqf, bs gur tbqf bs gur crbcyr juvpu
ner ebhaq nobhg lbh; 6:15 (Sbe gur YBEQ gul Tbq vf n wrnybhf Tbq nzbat
lbh) yrfg gur natre bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq or xvaqyrq ntnvafg gurr, naq
qrfgebl gurr sebz bss gur snpr bs gur rnegu.

6:16 Lr funyy abg grzcg gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, nf lr grzcgrq uvz va
Znffnu.

6:17 Lr funyy qvyvtragyl xrrc gur pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq,
naq uvf grfgvzbavrf, naq uvf fgnghgrf, juvpu ur ungu pbzznaqrq gurr.

6:18 Naq gubh funyg qb gung juvpu vf evtug naq tbbq va gur fvtug bs
gur YBEQ: gung vg znl or jryy jvgu gurr, naq gung gubh znlrfg tb va
naq cbffrff gur tbbq ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ fjner hagb gul snguref.

6:19 Gb pnfg bhg nyy guvar rarzvrf sebz orsber gurr, nf gur YBEQ ungu
fcbxra.

6:20 Naq jura gul fba nfxrgu gurr va gvzr gb pbzr, fnlvat, Jung zrna
gur grfgvzbavrf, naq gur fgnghgrf, naq gur whqtzragf, juvpu gur YBEQ
bhe Tbq ungu pbzznaqrq lbh?  6:21 Gura gubh funyg fnl hagb gul fba, Jr
jrer Cunenbu'f obaqzra va Rtlcg; naq gur YBEQ oebhtug hf bhg bs Rtlcg
jvgu n zvtugl unaq: 6:22 Naq gur YBEQ furjrq fvtaf naq jbaqref, terng
naq fber, hcba Rtlcg, hcba Cunenbu, naq hcba nyy uvf ubhfrubyq, orsber
bhe rlrf: 6:23 Naq ur oebhtug hf bhg sebz gurapr, gung ur zvtug oevat
hf va, gb tvir hf gur ynaq juvpu ur fjner hagb bhe snguref.

6:24 Naq gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq hf gb qb nyy gurfr fgnghgrf, gb srne gur
YBEQ bhe Tbq, sbe bhe tbbq nyjnlf, gung ur zvtug cerfreir hf nyvir, nf
vg vf ng guvf qnl.

6:25 Naq vg funyy or bhe evtugrbhfarff, vs jr bofreir gb qb nyy gurfr
pbzznaqzragf orsber gur YBEQ bhe Tbq, nf ur ungu pbzznaqrq hf.

7:1 Jura gur YBEQ gul Tbq funyy oevat gurr vagb gur ynaq juvgure gubh
tbrfg gb cbffrff vg, naq ungu pnfg bhg znal angvbaf orsber gurr, gur
Uvggvgrf, naq gur Tvetnfuvgrf, naq gur Nzbevgrf, naq gur Pnannavgrf,
naq gur Crevmmvgrf, naq gur Uvivgrf, naq gur Wrohfvgrf, frira angvbaf
terngre naq zvtugvre guna gubh; 7:2 Naq jura gur YBEQ gul Tbq funyy
qryvire gurz orsber gurr; gubh funyg fzvgr gurz, naq hggreyl qrfgebl
gurz; gubh funyg znxr ab pbiranag jvgu gurz, abe furj zrepl hagb gurz:
7:3 Arvgure funyg gubh znxr zneevntrf jvgu gurz; gul qnhtugre gubh
funyg abg tvir hagb uvf fba, abe uvf qnhtugre funyg gubh gnxr hagb gul
fba.

7:4 Sbe gurl jvyy ghea njnl gul fba sebz sbyybjvat zr, gung gurl znl
freir bgure tbqf: fb jvyy gur natre bs gur YBEQ or xvaqyrq ntnvafg
lbh, naq qrfgebl gurr fhqqrayl.

7:5 Ohg guhf funyy lr qrny jvgu gurz; lr funyy qrfgebl gurve nygnef,
naq oernx qbja gurve vzntrf, naq phg qbja gurve tebirf, naq ohea gurve
tenira vzntrf jvgu sver.

7:6 Sbe gubh neg na ubyl crbcyr hagb gur YBEQ gul Tbq: gur YBEQ gul
Tbq ungu pubfra gurr gb or n fcrpvny crbcyr hagb uvzfrys, nobir nyy
crbcyr gung ner hcba gur snpr bs gur rnegu.

7:7 Gur YBEQ qvq abg frg uvf ybir hcba lbh, abe pubbfr lbh, orpnhfr lr
jrer zber va ahzore guna nal crbcyr; sbe lr jrer gur srjrfg bs nyy
crbcyr: 7:8 Ohg orpnhfr gur YBEQ ybirq lbh, naq orpnhfr ur jbhyq xrrc
gur bngu juvpu ur unq fjbea hagb lbhe snguref, ungu gur YBEQ oebhtug
lbh bhg jvgu n zvtugl unaq, naq erqrrzrq lbh bhg bs gur ubhfr bs
obaqzra, sebz gur unaq bs Cunenbu xvat bs Rtlcg.

7:9 Xabj gurersber gung gur YBEQ gul Tbq, ur vf Tbq, gur snvgushy Tbq,
juvpu xrrcrgu pbiranag naq zrepl jvgu gurz gung ybir uvz naq xrrc uvf
pbzznaqzragf gb n gubhfnaq trarengvbaf; 7:10 Naq ercnlrgu gurz gung
ungr uvz gb gurve snpr, gb qrfgebl gurz: ur jvyy abg or fynpx gb uvz
gung ungrgu uvz, ur jvyy ercnl uvz gb uvf snpr.

7:11 Gubh funyg gurersber xrrc gur pbzznaqzragf, naq gur fgnghgrf, naq
gur whqtzragf, juvpu V pbzznaq gurr guvf qnl, gb qb gurz.

7:12 Jurersber vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, vs lr urnexra gb gurfr
whqtzragf, naq xrrc, naq qb gurz, gung gur YBEQ gul Tbq funyy xrrc
hagb gurr gur pbiranag naq gur zrepl juvpu ur fjner hagb gul snguref:
7:13 Naq ur jvyy ybir gurr, naq oyrff gurr, naq zhygvcyl gurr: ur jvyy
nyfb oyrff gur sehvg bs gul jbzo, naq gur sehvg bs gul ynaq, gul pbea,
naq gul jvar, naq guvar bvy, gur vapernfr bs gul xvar, naq gur sybpxf
bs gul furrc, va gur ynaq juvpu ur fjner hagb gul snguref gb tvir
gurr.

7:14 Gubh funyg or oyrffrq nobir nyy crbcyr: gurer funyy abg or znyr
be srznyr oneera nzbat lbh, be nzbat lbhe pnggyr.

7:15 Naq gur YBEQ jvyy gnxr njnl sebz gurr nyy fvpxarff, naq jvyy chg
abar bs gur rivy qvfrnfrf bs Rtlcg, juvpu gubh xabjrfg, hcba gurr; ohg
jvyy ynl gurz hcba nyy gurz gung ungr gurr.

7:16 Naq gubh funyg pbafhzr nyy gur crbcyr juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq
funyy qryvire gurr; guvar rlr funyy unir ab cvgl hcba gurz: arvgure
funyg gubh freir gurve tbqf; sbe gung jvyy or n faner hagb gurr.

7:17 Vs gubh funyg fnl va guvar urneg, Gurfr angvbaf ner zber guna V;
ubj pna V qvfcbffrff gurz?  7:18 Gubh funyg abg or nsenvq bs gurz: ohg
funyg jryy erzrzore jung gur YBEQ gul Tbq qvq hagb Cunenbu, naq hagb
nyy Rtlcg; 7:19 Gur terng grzcgngvbaf juvpu guvar rlrf fnj, naq gur
fvtaf, naq gur jbaqref, naq gur zvtugl unaq, naq gur fgergpurq bhg
nez, jurerol gur YBEQ gul Tbq oebhtug gurr bhg: fb funyy gur YBEQ gul
Tbq qb hagb nyy gur crbcyr bs jubz gubh neg nsenvq.

7:20 Zberbire gur YBEQ gul Tbq jvyy fraq gur ubearg nzbat gurz, hagvy
gurl gung ner yrsg, naq uvqr gurzfryirf sebz gurr, or qrfgeblrq.

7:21 Gubh funyg abg or nssevtugrq ng gurz: sbe gur YBEQ gul Tbq vf
nzbat lbh, n zvtugl Tbq naq greevoyr.

7:22 Naq gur YBEQ gul Tbq jvyy chg bhg gubfr angvbaf orsber gurr ol
yvggyr naq yvggyr: gubh znlrfg abg pbafhzr gurz ng bapr, yrfg gur
ornfgf bs gur svryq vapernfr hcba gurr.

7:23 Ohg gur YBEQ gul Tbq funyy qryvire gurz hagb gurr, naq funyy
qrfgebl gurz jvgu n zvtugl qrfgehpgvba, hagvy gurl or qrfgeblrq.

7:24 Naq ur funyy qryvire gurve xvatf vagb guvar unaq, naq gubh funyg
qrfgebl gurve anzr sebz haqre urnira: gurer funyy ab zna or noyr gb
fgnaq orsber gurr, hagvy gubh unir qrfgeblrq gurz.

7:25 Gur tenira vzntrf bs gurve tbqf funyy lr ohea jvgu sver: gubh
funyg abg qrfver gur fvyire be tbyq gung vf ba gurz, abe gnxr vg hagb
gurr, yrfg gubh or fanerq gureva: sbe vg vf na nobzvangvba gb gur YBEQ
gul Tbq.

7:26 Arvgure funyg gubh oevat na nobzvangvba vagb guvar ubhfr, yrfg
gubh or n phefrq guvat yvxr vg: ohg gubh funyg hggreyl qrgrfg vg, naq
gubh funyg hggreyl noube vg; sbe vg vf n phefrq guvat.

8:1 Nyy gur pbzznaqzragf juvpu V pbzznaq gurr guvf qnl funyy lr
bofreir gb qb, gung lr znl yvir, naq zhygvcyl, naq tb va naq cbffrff
gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ fjner hagb lbhe snguref.

8:2 Naq gubh funyg erzrzore nyy gur jnl juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq yrq
gurr gurfr sbegl lrnef va gur jvyqrearff, gb uhzoyr gurr, naq gb cebir
gurr, gb xabj jung jnf va guvar urneg, jurgure gubh jbhyqrfg xrrc uvf
pbzznaqzragf, be ab.

8:3 Naq ur uhzoyrq gurr, naq fhssrerq gurr gb uhatre, naq srq gurr
jvgu znaan, juvpu gubh xarjrfg abg, arvgure qvq gul snguref xabj; gung
ur zvtug znxr gurr xabj gung zna qbgu abg yvir ol oernq bayl, ohg ol
rirel jbeq gung cebprrqrgu bhg bs gur zbhgu bs gur YBEQ qbgu zna yvir.

8:4 Gul envzrag jnkrq abg byq hcba gurr, arvgure qvq gul sbbg fjryy,
gurfr sbegl lrnef.

8:5 Gubh funyg nyfb pbafvqre va guvar urneg, gung, nf n zna punfgrargu
uvf fba, fb gur YBEQ gul Tbq punfgrargu gurr.

8:6 Gurersber gubh funyg xrrc gur pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq, gb
jnyx va uvf jnlf, naq gb srne uvz.

8:7 Sbe gur YBEQ gul Tbq oevatrgu gurr vagb n tbbq ynaq, n ynaq bs
oebbxf bs jngre, bs sbhagnvaf naq qrcguf gung fcevat bhg bs inyyrlf
naq uvyyf; 8:8 N ynaq bs jurng, naq oneyrl, naq ivarf, naq svt gerrf,
naq cbzrtenangrf; n ynaq bs bvy byvir, naq ubarl; 8:9 N ynaq jurerva
gubh funyg rng oernq jvgubhg fpneprarff, gubh funyg abg ynpx nal guvat
va vg; n ynaq jubfr fgbarf ner veba, naq bhg bs jubfr uvyyf gubh
znlrfg qvt oenff.

8:10 Jura gubh unfg rngra naq neg shyy, gura gubh funyg oyrff gur YBEQ
gul Tbq sbe gur tbbq ynaq juvpu ur ungu tvira gurr.

8:11 Orjner gung gubh sbetrg abg gur YBEQ gul Tbq, va abg xrrcvat uvf
pbzznaqzragf, naq uvf whqtzragf, naq uvf fgnghgrf, juvpu V pbzznaq
gurr guvf qnl: 8:12 Yrfg jura gubh unfg rngra naq neg shyy, naq unfg
ohvyg tbbqyl ubhfrf, naq qjryg gurerva; 8:13 Naq jura gul ureqf naq
gul sybpxf zhygvcyl, naq gul fvyire naq gul tbyq vf zhygvcyvrq, naq
nyy gung gubh unfg vf zhygvcyvrq; 8:14 Gura guvar urneg or yvsgrq hc,
naq gubh sbetrg gur YBEQ gul Tbq, juvpu oebhtug gurr sbegu bhg bs gur
ynaq bs Rtlcg, sebz gur ubhfr bs obaqntr; 8:15 Jub yrq gurr guebhtu
gung terng naq greevoyr jvyqrearff, jurerva jrer svrel frecragf, naq
fpbecvbaf, naq qebhtug, jurer gurer jnf ab jngre; jub oebhtug gurr
sbegu jngre bhg bs gur ebpx bs syvag; 8:16 Jub srq gurr va gur
jvyqrearff jvgu znaan, juvpu gul snguref xarj abg, gung ur zvtug
uhzoyr gurr, naq gung ur zvtug cebir gurr, gb qb gurr tbbq ng gul
ynggre raq; 8:17 Naq gubh fnl va guvar urneg, Zl cbjre naq gur zvtug
bs zvar unaq ungu tbggra zr guvf jrnygu.

8:18 Ohg gubh funyg erzrzore gur YBEQ gul Tbq: sbe vg vf ur gung
tvirgu gurr cbjre gb trg jrnygu, gung ur znl rfgnoyvfu uvf pbiranag
juvpu ur fjner hagb gul snguref, nf vg vf guvf qnl.

8:19 Naq vg funyy or, vs gubh qb ng nyy sbetrg gur YBEQ gul Tbq, naq
jnyx nsgre bgure tbqf, naq freir gurz, naq jbefuvc gurz, V grfgvsl
ntnvafg lbh guvf qnl gung lr funyy fheryl crevfu.

8:20 Nf gur angvbaf juvpu gur YBEQ qrfgeblrgu orsber lbhe snpr, fb
funyy lr crevfu; orpnhfr lr jbhyq abg or borqvrag hagb gur ibvpr bs
gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

9:1 Urne, B Vfenry: Gubh neg gb cnff bire Wbeqna guvf qnl, gb tb va gb
cbffrff angvbaf terngre naq zvtugvre guna gulfrys, pvgvrf terng naq
sraprq hc gb urnira, 9:2 N crbcyr terng naq gnyy, gur puvyqera bs gur
Nanxvzf, jubz gubh xabjrfg, naq bs jubz gubh unfg urneq fnl, Jub pna
fgnaq orsber gur puvyqera bs Nanx!  9:3 Haqrefgnaq gurersber guvf qnl,
gung gur YBEQ gul Tbq vf ur juvpu tbrgu bire orsber gurr; nf n
pbafhzvat sver ur funyy qrfgebl gurz, naq ur funyy oevat gurz qbja
orsber gul snpr: fb funyg gubh qevir gurz bhg, naq qrfgebl gurz
dhvpxyl, nf gur YBEQ ungu fnvq hagb gurr.

9:4 Fcrnx abg gubh va guvar urneg, nsgre gung gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu
pnfg gurz bhg sebz orsber gurr, fnlvat, Sbe zl evtugrbhfarff gur YBEQ
ungu oebhtug zr va gb cbffrff guvf ynaq: ohg sbe gur jvpxrqarff bs
gurfr angvbaf gur YBEQ qbgu qevir gurz bhg sebz orsber gurr.

9:5 Abg sbe gul evtugrbhfarff, be sbe gur hcevtugarff bs guvar urneg,
qbfg gubh tb gb cbffrff gurve ynaq: ohg sbe gur jvpxrqarff bs gurfr
angvbaf gur YBEQ gul Tbq qbgu qevir gurz bhg sebz orsber gurr, naq
gung ur znl cresbez gur jbeq juvpu gur YBEQ fjner hagb gul snguref,
Noenunz, Vfnnp, naq Wnpbo.

9:6 Haqrefgnaq gurersber, gung gur YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu gurr abg guvf
tbbq ynaq gb cbffrff vg sbe gul evtugrbhfarff; sbe gubh neg n
fgvssarpxrq crbcyr.

9:7 Erzrzore, naq sbetrg abg, ubj gubh cebibxrqfg gur YBEQ gul Tbq gb
jengu va gur jvyqrearff: sebz gur qnl gung gubh qvqfg qrcneg bhg bs
gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, hagvy lr pnzr hagb guvf cynpr, lr unir orra
eroryyvbhf ntnvafg gur YBEQ.

9:8 Nyfb va Ubero lr cebibxrq gur YBEQ gb jengu, fb gung gur YBEQ jnf
natel jvgu lbh gb unir qrfgeblrq lbh.

9:9 Jura V jnf tbar hc vagb gur zbhag gb erprvir gur gnoyrf bs fgbar,
rira gur gnoyrf bs gur pbiranag juvpu gur YBEQ znqr jvgu lbh, gura V
nobqr va gur zbhag sbegl qnlf naq sbegl avtugf, V arvgure qvq rng
oernq abe qevax jngre: 9:10 Naq gur YBEQ qryvirerq hagb zr gjb gnoyrf
bs fgbar jevggra jvgu gur svatre bs Tbq; naq ba gurz jnf jevggra
nppbeqvat gb nyy gur jbeqf, juvpu gur YBEQ fcnxr jvgu lbh va gur zbhag
bhg bs gur zvqfg bs gur sver va gur qnl bs gur nffrzoyl.

9:11 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng gur raq bs sbegl qnlf naq sbegl avtugf,
gung gur YBEQ tnir zr gur gjb gnoyrf bs fgbar, rira gur gnoyrf bs gur
pbiranag.

9:12 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb zr, Nevfr, trg gurr qbja dhvpxyl sebz
urapr; sbe gul crbcyr juvpu gubh unfg oebhtug sbegu bhg bs Rtlcg unir
pbeehcgrq gurzfryirf; gurl ner dhvpxyl ghearq nfvqr bhg bs gur jnl
juvpu V pbzznaqrq gurz; gurl unir znqr gurz n zbygra vzntr.

9:13 Shegurezber gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb zr, fnlvat, V unir frra guvf
crbcyr, naq, orubyq, vg vf n fgvssarpxrq crbcyr: 9:14 Yrg zr nybar,
gung V znl qrfgebl gurz, naq oybg bhg gurve anzr sebz haqre urnira:
naq V jvyy znxr bs gurr n angvba zvtugvre naq terngre guna gurl.

9:15 Fb V ghearq naq pnzr qbja sebz gur zbhag, naq gur zbhag ohearq
jvgu sver: naq gur gjb gnoyrf bs gur pbiranag jrer va zl gjb unaqf.

9:16 Naq V ybbxrq, naq, orubyq, lr unq fvaarq ntnvafg gur YBEQ lbhe
Tbq, naq unq znqr lbh n zbygra pnys: lr unq ghearq nfvqr dhvpxyl bhg
bs gur jnl juvpu gur YBEQ unq pbzznaqrq lbh.

9:17 Naq V gbbx gur gjb gnoyrf, naq pnfg gurz bhg bs zl gjb unaqf, naq
oenxr gurz orsber lbhe rlrf.

9:18 Naq V sryy qbja orsber gur YBEQ, nf ng gur svefg, sbegl qnlf naq
sbegl avtugf: V qvq arvgure rng oernq, abe qevax jngre, orpnhfr bs nyy
lbhe fvaf juvpu lr fvaarq, va qbvat jvpxrqyl va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ,
gb cebibxr uvz gb natre.

9:19 Sbe V jnf nsenvq bs gur natre naq ubg qvfcyrnfher, jurerjvgu gur
YBEQ jnf jebgu ntnvafg lbh gb qrfgebl lbh. Ohg gur YBEQ urnexrarq hagb
zr ng gung gvzr nyfb.

9:20 Naq gur YBEQ jnf irel natel jvgu Nneba gb unir qrfgeblrq uvz: naq
V cenlrq sbe Nneba nyfb gur fnzr gvzr.

9:21 Naq V gbbx lbhe fva, gur pnys juvpu lr unq znqr, naq oheag vg
jvgu sver, naq fgnzcrq vg, naq tebhaq vg irel fznyy, rira hagvy vg jnf
nf fznyy nf qhfg: naq V pnfg gur qhfg gurerbs vagb gur oebbx gung
qrfpraqrq bhg bs gur zbhag.

9:22 Naq ng Gnorenu, naq ng Znffnu, naq ng Xvoebguunggnninu, lr
cebibxrq gur YBEQ gb jengu.

9:23 Yvxrjvfr jura gur YBEQ frag lbh sebz Xnqrfuonearn, fnlvat, Tb hc
naq cbffrff gur ynaq juvpu V unir tvira lbh; gura lr eroryyrq ntnvafg
gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, naq lr oryvrirq uvz abg, abe
urnexrarq gb uvf ibvpr.

9:24 Lr unir orra eroryyvbhf ntnvafg gur YBEQ sebz gur qnl gung V xarj
lbh.

9:25 Guhf V sryy qbja orsber gur YBEQ sbegl qnlf naq sbegl avtugf, nf
V sryy qbja ng gur svefg; orpnhfr gur YBEQ unq fnvq ur jbhyq qrfgebl
lbh.

9:26 V cenlrq gurersber hagb gur YBEQ, naq fnvq, B Ybeq TBQ, qrfgebl
abg gul crbcyr naq guvar vaurevgnapr, juvpu gubh unfg erqrrzrq guebhtu
gul terngarff, juvpu gubh unfg oebhtug sbegu bhg bs Rtlcg jvgu n
zvtugl unaq.

9:27 Erzrzore gul freinagf, Noenunz, Vfnnp, naq Wnpbo; ybbx abg hagb
gur fghoobeaarff bs guvf crbcyr, abe gb gurve jvpxrqarff, abe gb gurve
fva: 9:28 Yrfg gur ynaq jurapr gubh oebhtugrfg hf bhg fnl, Orpnhfr gur
YBEQ jnf abg noyr gb oevat gurz vagb gur ynaq juvpu ur cebzvfrq gurz,
naq orpnhfr ur ungrq gurz, ur ungu oebhtug gurz bhg gb fynl gurz va
gur jvyqrearff.

9:29 Lrg gurl ner gul crbcyr naq guvar vaurevgnapr, juvpu gubh
oebhtugrfg bhg ol gul zvtugl cbjre naq ol gul fgergpurq bhg nez.

10:1 Ng gung gvzr gur YBEQ fnvq hagb zr, Urj gurr gjb gnoyrf bs fgbar
yvxr hagb gur svefg, naq pbzr hc hagb zr vagb gur zbhag, naq znxr gurr
na nex bs jbbq.

10:2 Naq V jvyy jevgr ba gur gnoyrf gur jbeqf gung jrer va gur svefg
gnoyrf juvpu gubh oenxrfg, naq gubh funyg chg gurz va gur nex.

10:3 Naq V znqr na nex bs fuvggvz jbbq, naq urjrq gjb gnoyrf bs fgbar
yvxr hagb gur svefg, naq jrag hc vagb gur zbhag, univat gur gjb gnoyrf
va zvar unaq.

10:4 Naq ur jebgr ba gur gnoyrf, nppbeqvat gb gur svefg jevgvat, gur
gra pbzznaqzragf, juvpu gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb lbh va gur zbhag bhg bs
gur zvqfg bs gur sver va gur qnl bs gur nffrzoyl: naq gur YBEQ tnir
gurz hagb zr.

10:5 Naq V ghearq zlfrys naq pnzr qbja sebz gur zbhag, naq chg gur
gnoyrf va gur nex juvpu V unq znqr; naq gurer gurl or, nf gur YBEQ
pbzznaqrq zr.

10:6 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry gbbx gurve wbhearl sebz Orrebgu bs gur
puvyqera bs Wnnxna gb Zbfren: gurer Nneba qvrq, naq gurer ur jnf
ohevrq; naq Ryrnmne uvf fba zvavfgrerq va gur cevrfg'f bssvpr va uvf
fgrnq.

10:7 Sebz gurapr gurl wbhearlrq hagb Thqtbqnu; naq sebz Thqtbqnu gb
Wbgongu, n ynaq bs eviref bs jngref.

10:8 Ng gung gvzr gur YBEQ frcnengrq gur gevor bs Yriv, gb orne gur
nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ, gb fgnaq orsber gur YBEQ gb zvavfgre
hagb uvz, naq gb oyrff va uvf anzr, hagb guvf qnl.

10:9 Jurersber Yriv ungu ab cneg abe vaurevgnapr jvgu uvf oerguera;
gur YBEQ vf uvf vaurevgnapr, nppbeqvat nf gur YBEQ gul Tbq cebzvfrq
uvz.

10:10 Naq V fgnlrq va gur zbhag, nppbeqvat gb gur svefg gvzr, sbegl
qnlf naq sbegl avtugf; naq gur YBEQ urnexrarq hagb zr ng gung gvzr
nyfb, naq gur YBEQ jbhyq abg qrfgebl gurr.

10:11 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb zr, Nevfr, gnxr gul wbhearl orsber gur
crbcyr, gung gurl znl tb va naq cbffrff gur ynaq, juvpu V fjner hagb
gurve snguref gb tvir hagb gurz.

10:12 Naq abj, Vfenry, jung qbgu gur YBEQ gul Tbq erdhver bs gurr, ohg
gb srne gur YBEQ gul Tbq, gb jnyx va nyy uvf jnlf, naq gb ybir uvz,
naq gb freir gur YBEQ gul Tbq jvgu nyy gul urneg naq jvgu nyy gul
fbhy, 10:13 Gb xrrc gur pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ, naq uvf fgnghgrf,
juvpu V pbzznaq gurr guvf qnl sbe gul tbbq?  10:14 Orubyq, gur urnira
naq gur urnira bs urniraf vf gur YBEQ'f gul Tbq, gur rnegu nyfb, jvgu
nyy gung gurerva vf.

10:15 Bayl gur YBEQ unq n qryvtug va gul snguref gb ybir gurz, naq ur
pubfr gurve frrq nsgre gurz, rira lbh nobir nyy crbcyr, nf vg vf guvf
qnl.

10:16 Pvephzpvfr gurersber gur sberfxva bs lbhe urneg, naq or ab zber
fgvssarpxrq.

10:17 Sbe gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq vf Tbq bs tbqf, naq Ybeq bs ybeqf, n terng
Tbq, n zvtugl, naq n greevoyr, juvpu ertneqrgu abg crefbaf, abe gnxrgu
erjneq: 10:18 Ur qbgu rkrphgr gur whqtzrag bs gur sngureyrff naq
jvqbj, naq ybirgu gur fgenatre, va tvivat uvz sbbq naq envzrag.

10:19 Ybir lr gurersber gur fgenatre: sbe lr jrer fgenatref va gur
ynaq bs Rtlcg.

10:20 Gubh funyg srne gur YBEQ gul Tbq; uvz funyg gubh freir, naq gb
uvz funyg gubh pyrnir, naq fjrne ol uvf anzr.

10:21 Ur vf gul cenvfr, naq ur vf gul Tbq, gung ungu qbar sbe gurr
gurfr terng naq greevoyr guvatf, juvpu guvar rlrf unir frra.

10:22 Gul snguref jrag qbja vagb Rtlcg jvgu guerrfpber naq gra
crefbaf; naq abj gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu znqr gurr nf gur fgnef bs
urnira sbe zhygvghqr.

11:1 Gurersber gubh funyg ybir gur YBEQ gul Tbq, naq xrrc uvf punetr,
naq uvf fgnghgrf, naq uvf whqtzragf, naq uvf pbzznaqzragf, nyjnl.

11:2 Naq xabj lr guvf qnl: sbe V fcrnx abg jvgu lbhe puvyqera juvpu
unir abg xabja, naq juvpu unir abg frra gur punfgvfrzrag bs gur YBEQ
lbhe Tbq, uvf terngarff, uvf zvtugl unaq, naq uvf fgergpurq bhg nez,
11:3 Naq uvf zvenpyrf, naq uvf npgf, juvpu ur qvq va gur zvqfg bs
Rtlcg hagb Cunenbu gur xvat bs Rtlcg, naq hagb nyy uvf ynaq; 11:4 Naq
jung ur qvq hagb gur nezl bs Rtlcg, hagb gurve ubefrf, naq gb gurve
punevbgf; ubj ur znqr gur jngre bs gur Erq frn gb biresybj gurz nf
gurl chefhrq nsgre lbh, naq ubj gur YBEQ ungu qrfgeblrq gurz hagb guvf
qnl; 11:5 Naq jung ur qvq hagb lbh va gur jvyqrearff, hagvy lr pnzr
vagb guvf cynpr; 11:6 Naq jung ur qvq hagb Qnguna naq Novenz, gur fbaf
bs Ryvno, gur fba bs Erhora: ubj gur rnegu bcrarq ure zbhgu, naq
fjnyybjrq gurz hc, naq gurve ubhfrubyqf, naq gurve gragf, naq nyy gur
fhofgnapr gung jnf va gurve cbffrffvba, va gur zvqfg bs nyy Vfenry:
11:7 Ohg lbhe rlrf unir frra nyy gur terng npgf bs gur YBEQ juvpu ur
qvq.

11:8 Gurersber funyy lr xrrc nyy gur pbzznaqzragf juvpu V pbzznaq lbh
guvf qnl, gung lr znl or fgebat, naq tb va naq cbffrff gur ynaq,
juvgure lr tb gb cbffrff vg; 11:9 Naq gung lr znl cebybat lbhe qnlf va
gur ynaq, juvpu gur YBEQ fjner hagb lbhe snguref gb tvir hagb gurz naq
gb gurve frrq, n ynaq gung sybjrgu jvgu zvyx naq ubarl.

11:10 Sbe gur ynaq, juvgure gubh tbrfg va gb cbffrff vg, vf abg nf gur
ynaq bs Rtlcg, sebz jurapr lr pnzr bhg, jurer gubh fbjrqfg gul frrq,
naq jngrerqfg vg jvgu gul sbbg, nf n tneqra bs ureof: 11:11 Ohg gur
ynaq, juvgure lr tb gb cbffrff vg, vf n ynaq bs uvyyf naq inyyrlf, naq
qevaxrgu jngre bs gur enva bs urnira: 11:12 N ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ gul
Tbq pnergu sbe: gur rlrf bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq ner nyjnlf hcba vg, sebz
gur ortvaavat bs gur lrne rira hagb gur raq bs gur lrne.

11:13 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, vs lr funyy urnexra qvyvtragyl hagb
zl pbzznaqzragf juvpu V pbzznaq lbh guvf qnl, gb ybir gur YBEQ lbhe
Tbq, naq gb freir uvz jvgu nyy lbhe urneg naq jvgu nyy lbhe fbhy,
11:14 Gung V jvyy tvir lbh gur enva bs lbhe ynaq va uvf qhr frnfba,
gur svefg enva naq gur ynggre enva, gung gubh znlrfg tngure va gul
pbea, naq gul jvar, naq guvar bvy.

11:15 Naq V jvyy fraq tenff va gul svryqf sbe gul pnggyr, gung gubh
znlrfg rng naq or shyy.

11:16 Gnxr urrq gb lbhefryirf, gung lbhe urneg or abg qrprvirq, naq lr
ghea nfvqr, naq freir bgure tbqf, naq jbefuvc gurz; 11:17 Naq gura gur
YBEQ'f jengu or xvaqyrq ntnvafg lbh, naq ur fuhg hc gur urnira, gung
gurer or ab enva, naq gung gur ynaq lvryq abg ure sehvg; naq yrfg lr
crevfu dhvpxyl sebz bss gur tbbq ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ tvirgu lbh.

11:18 Gurersber funyy lr ynl hc gurfr zl jbeqf va lbhe urneg naq va
lbhe fbhy, naq ovaq gurz sbe n fvta hcba lbhe unaq, gung gurl znl or
nf sebagyrgf orgjrra lbhe rlrf.

11:19 Naq lr funyy grnpu gurz lbhe puvyqera, fcrnxvat bs gurz jura
gubh fvggrfg va guvar ubhfr, naq jura gubh jnyxrfg ol gur jnl, jura
gubh yvrfg qbja, naq jura gubh evfrfg hc.

11:20 Naq gubh funyg jevgr gurz hcba gur qbbe cbfgf bs guvar ubhfr,
naq hcba gul tngrf: 11:21 Gung lbhe qnlf znl or zhygvcyvrq, naq gur
qnlf bs lbhe puvyqera, va gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ fjner hagb lbhe
snguref gb tvir gurz, nf gur qnlf bs urnira hcba gur rnegu.

11:22 Sbe vs lr funyy qvyvtragyl xrrc nyy gurfr pbzznaqzragf juvpu V
pbzznaq lbh, gb qb gurz, gb ybir gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, gb jnyx va nyy uvf
jnlf, naq gb pyrnir hagb uvz; 11:23 Gura jvyy gur YBEQ qevir bhg nyy
gurfr angvbaf sebz orsber lbh, naq lr funyy cbffrff terngre angvbaf
naq zvtugvre guna lbhefryirf.

11:24 Rirel cynpr jurerba gur fbyrf bs lbhe srrg funyy gernq funyy or
lbhef: sebz gur jvyqrearff naq Yronaba, sebz gur evire, gur evire
Rhcuengrf, rira hagb gur hggrezbfg frn funyy lbhe pbnfg or.

11:25 Gurer funyy ab zna or noyr gb fgnaq orsber lbh: sbe gur YBEQ
lbhe Tbq funyy ynl gur srne bs lbh naq gur qernq bs lbh hcba nyy gur
ynaq gung lr funyy gernq hcba, nf ur ungu fnvq hagb lbh.

11:26 Orubyq, V frg orsber lbh guvf qnl n oyrffvat naq n phefr; 11:27
N oyrffvat, vs lr borl gur pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, juvpu V
pbzznaq lbh guvf qnl: 11:28 Naq n phefr, vs lr jvyy abg borl gur
pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, ohg ghea nfvqr bhg bs gur jnl juvpu
V pbzznaq lbh guvf qnl, gb tb nsgre bgure tbqf, juvpu lr unir abg
xabja.

11:29 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, jura gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu oebhtug
gurr va hagb gur ynaq juvgure gubh tbrfg gb cbffrff vg, gung gubh
funyg chg gur oyrffvat hcba zbhag Trevmvz, naq gur phefr hcba zbhag
Rony.

11:30 Ner gurl abg ba gur bgure fvqr Wbeqna, ol gur jnl jurer gur fha
tbrgu qbja, va gur ynaq bs gur Pnannavgrf, juvpu qjryy va gur
punzcnvta bire ntnvafg Tvytny, orfvqr gur cynvaf bs Zberu?  11:31 Sbe
lr funyy cnff bire Wbeqna gb tb va gb cbffrff gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ
lbhe Tbq tvirgu lbh, naq lr funyy cbffrff vg, naq qjryy gurerva.

11:32 Naq lr funyy bofreir gb qb nyy gur fgnghgrf naq whqtzragf juvpu
V frg orsber lbh guvf qnl.

12:1 Gurfr ner gur fgnghgrf naq whqtzragf, juvpu lr funyy bofreir gb
qb va gur ynaq, juvpu gur YBEQ Tbq bs gul snguref tvirgu gurr gb
cbffrff vg, nyy gur qnlf gung lr yvir hcba gur rnegu.

12:2 Lr funyy hggreyl qrfgebl nyy gur cynprf, jurerva gur angvbaf
juvpu lr funyy cbffrff freirq gurve tbqf, hcba gur uvtu zbhagnvaf, naq
hcba gur uvyyf, naq haqre rirel terra gerr: 12:3 Naq lr funyy
bireguebj gurve nygnef, naq oernx gurve cvyynef, naq ohea gurve tebirf
jvgu sver; naq lr funyy urj qbja gur tenira vzntrf bs gurve tbqf, naq
qrfgebl gur anzrf bs gurz bhg bs gung cynpr.

12:4 Lr funyy abg qb fb hagb gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

12:5 Ohg hagb gur cynpr juvpu gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq funyy pubbfr bhg bs
nyy lbhe gevorf gb chg uvf anzr gurer, rira hagb uvf unovgngvba funyy
lr frrx, naq guvgure gubh funyg pbzr: 12:6 Naq guvgure lr funyy oevat
lbhe oheag bssrevatf, naq lbhe fnpevsvprf, naq lbhe gvgurf, naq urnir
bssrevatf bs lbhe unaq, naq lbhe ibjf, naq lbhe serrjvyy bssrevatf,
naq gur svefgyvatf bs lbhe ureqf naq bs lbhe sybpxf: 12:7 Naq gurer lr
funyy rng orsber gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, naq lr funyy erwbvpr va nyy gung
lr chg lbhe unaq hagb, lr naq lbhe ubhfrubyqf, jurerva gur YBEQ gul
Tbq ungu oyrffrq gurr.

12:8 Lr funyy abg qb nsgre nyy gur guvatf gung jr qb urer guvf qnl,
rirel zna jungfbrire vf evtug va uvf bja rlrf.

12:9 Sbe lr ner abg nf lrg pbzr gb gur erfg naq gb gur vaurevgnapr,
juvpu gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq tvirgu lbh.

12:10 Ohg jura lr tb bire Wbeqna, naq qjryy va gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ
lbhe Tbq tvirgu lbh gb vaurevg, naq jura ur tvirgu lbh erfg sebz nyy
lbhe rarzvrf ebhaq nobhg, fb gung lr qjryy va fnsrgl; 12:11 Gura gurer
funyy or n cynpr juvpu gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq funyy pubbfr gb pnhfr uvf
anzr gb qjryy gurer; guvgure funyy lr oevat nyy gung V pbzznaq lbh;
lbhe oheag bssrevatf, naq lbhe fnpevsvprf, lbhe gvgurf, naq gur urnir
bssrevat bs lbhe unaq, naq nyy lbhe pubvpr ibjf juvpu lr ibj hagb gur
YBEQ: 12:12 Naq lr funyy erwbvpr orsber gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, lr, naq
lbhe fbaf, naq lbhe qnhtugref, naq lbhe zrafreinagf, naq lbhe
znvqfreinagf, naq gur Yrivgr gung vf jvguva lbhe tngrf; sbenfzhpu nf
ur ungu ab cneg abe vaurevgnapr jvgu lbh.

12:13 Gnxr urrq gb gulfrys gung gubh bssre abg gul oheag bssrevatf va
rirel cynpr gung gubh frrfg: 12:14 Ohg va gur cynpr juvpu gur YBEQ
funyy pubbfr va bar bs gul gevorf, gurer gubh funyg bssre gul oheag
bssrevatf, naq gurer gubh funyg qb nyy gung V pbzznaq gurr.

12:15 Abgjvgufgnaqvat gubh znlrfg xvyy naq rng syrfu va nyy gul tngrf,
jungfbrire gul fbhy yhfgrgu nsgre, nppbeqvat gb gur oyrffvat bs gur
YBEQ gul Tbq juvpu ur ungu tvira gurr: gur hapyrna naq gur pyrna znl
rng gurerbs, nf bs gur ebrohpx, naq nf bs gur uneg.

12:16 Bayl lr funyy abg rng gur oybbq; lr funyy cbhe vg hcba gur rnegu
nf jngre.

12:17 Gubh znlrfg abg rng jvguva gul tngrf gur gvgur bs gul pbea, be
bs gul jvar, be bs gul bvy, be gur svefgyvatf bs gul ureqf be bs gul
sybpx, abe nal bs gul ibjf juvpu gubh ibjrfg, abe gul serrjvyy
bssrevatf, be urnir bssrevat bs guvar unaq: 12:18 Ohg gubh zhfg rng
gurz orsber gur YBEQ gul Tbq va gur cynpr juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq funyy
pubbfr, gubh, naq gul fba, naq gul qnhtugre, naq gul znafreinag, naq
gul znvqfreinag, naq gur Yrivgr gung vf jvguva gul tngrf: naq gubh
funyg erwbvpr orsber gur YBEQ gul Tbq va nyy gung gubh chggrfg guvar
unaqf hagb.

12:19 Gnxr urrq gb gulfrys gung gubh sbefnxr abg gur Yrivgr nf ybat nf
gubh yvirfg hcba gur rnegu.

12:20 Jura gur YBEQ gul Tbq funyy raynetr gul obeqre, nf ur ungu
cebzvfrq gurr, naq gubh funyg fnl, V jvyy rng syrfu, orpnhfr gul fbhy
ybatrgu gb rng syrfu; gubh znlrfg rng syrfu, jungfbrire gul fbhy
yhfgrgu nsgre.

12:21 Vs gur cynpr juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu pubfra gb chg uvf anzr
gurer or gbb sne sebz gurr, gura gubh funyg xvyy bs gul ureq naq bs
gul sybpx, juvpu gur YBEQ ungu tvira gurr, nf V unir pbzznaqrq gurr,
naq gubh funyg rng va gul tngrf jungfbrire gul fbhy yhfgrgu nsgre.

12:22 Rira nf gur ebrohpx naq gur uneg vf rngra, fb gubh funyg rng
gurz: gur hapyrna naq gur pyrna funyy rng bs gurz nyvxr.

12:23 Bayl or fher gung gubh rng abg gur oybbq: sbe gur oybbq vf gur
yvsr; naq gubh znlrfg abg rng gur yvsr jvgu gur syrfu.

12:24 Gubh funyg abg rng vg; gubh funyg cbhe vg hcba gur rnegu nf
jngre.

12:25 Gubh funyg abg rng vg; gung vg znl tb jryy jvgu gurr, naq jvgu
gul puvyqera nsgre gurr, jura gubh funyg qb gung juvpu vf evtug va gur
fvtug bs gur YBEQ.

12:26 Bayl gul ubyl guvatf juvpu gubh unfg, naq gul ibjf, gubh funyg
gnxr, naq tb hagb gur cynpr juvpu gur YBEQ funyy pubbfr: 12:27 Naq
gubh funyg bssre gul oheag bssrevatf, gur syrfu naq gur oybbq, hcba
gur nygne bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq: naq gur oybbq bs gul fnpevsvprf funyy
or cbherq bhg hcba gur nygne bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq, naq gubh funyg rng
gur syrfu.

12:28 Bofreir naq urne nyy gurfr jbeqf juvpu V pbzznaq gurr, gung vg
znl tb jryy jvgu gurr, naq jvgu gul puvyqera nsgre gurr sbe rire, jura
gubh qbrfg gung juvpu vf tbbq naq evtug va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ gul
Tbq.

12:29 Jura gur YBEQ gul Tbq funyy phg bss gur angvbaf sebz orsber
gurr, juvgure gubh tbrfg gb cbffrff gurz, naq gubh fhpprrqrfg gurz,
naq qjryyrfg va gurve ynaq; 12:30 Gnxr urrq gb gulfrys gung gubh or
abg fanerq ol sbyybjvat gurz, nsgre gung gurl or qrfgeblrq sebz orsber
gurr; naq gung gubh radhver abg nsgre gurve tbqf, fnlvat, Ubj qvq
gurfr angvbaf freir gurve tbqf? rira fb jvyy V qb yvxrjvfr.

12:31 Gubh funyg abg qb fb hagb gur YBEQ gul Tbq: sbe rirel
nobzvangvba gb gur YBEQ, juvpu ur ungrgu, unir gurl qbar hagb gurve
tbqf; sbe rira gurve fbaf naq gurve qnhtugref gurl unir oheag va gur
sver gb gurve tbqf.

12:32 Jung guvat fbrire V pbzznaq lbh, bofreir gb qb vg: gubh funyg
abg nqq gurergb, abe qvzvavfu sebz vg.

13:1 Vs gurer nevfr nzbat lbh n cebcurg, be n qernzre bs qernzf, naq
tvirgu gurr n fvta be n jbaqre, 13:2 Naq gur fvta be gur jbaqre pbzr
gb cnff, jurerbs ur fcnxr hagb gurr, fnlvat, Yrg hf tb nsgre bgure
tbqf, juvpu gubh unfg abg xabja, naq yrg hf freir gurz; 13:3 Gubh
funyg abg urnexra hagb gur jbeqf bs gung cebcurg, be gung qernzre bs
qernzf: sbe gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq cebirgu lbh, gb xabj jurgure lr ybir gur
YBEQ lbhe Tbq jvgu nyy lbhe urneg naq jvgu nyy lbhe fbhy.

13:4 Lr funyy jnyx nsgre gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, naq srne uvz, naq xrrc uvf
pbzznaqzragf, naq borl uvf ibvpr, naq lr funyy freir uvz, naq pyrnir
hagb uvz.

13:5 Naq gung cebcurg, be gung qernzre bs qernzf, funyy or chg gb
qrngu; orpnhfr ur ungu fcbxra gb ghea lbh njnl sebz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq,
juvpu oebhtug lbh bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, naq erqrrzrq lbh bhg bs
gur ubhfr bs obaqntr, gb guehfg gurr bhg bs gur jnl juvpu gur YBEQ gul
Tbq pbzznaqrq gurr gb jnyx va. Fb funyg gubh chg gur rivy njnl sebz
gur zvqfg bs gurr.

13:6 Vs gul oebgure, gur fba bs gul zbgure, be gul fba, be gul
qnhtugre, be gur jvsr bs gul obfbz, be gul sevraq, juvpu vf nf guvar
bja fbhy, ragvpr gurr frpergyl, fnlvat, Yrg hf tb naq freir bgure
tbqf, juvpu gubh unfg abg xabja, gubh, abe gul snguref; 13:7 Anzryl,
bs gur tbqf bs gur crbcyr juvpu ner ebhaq nobhg lbh, avtu hagb gurr,
be sne bss sebz gurr, sebz gur bar raq bs gur rnegu rira hagb gur
bgure raq bs gur rnegu; 13:8 Gubh funyg abg pbafrag hagb uvz, abe
urnexra hagb uvz; arvgure funyy guvar rlr cvgl uvz, arvgure funyg gubh
fcner, arvgure funyg gubh pbaprny uvz: 13:9 Ohg gubh funyg fheryl xvyy
uvz; guvar unaq funyy or svefg hcba uvz gb chg uvz gb qrngu, naq
nsgrejneqf gur unaq bs nyy gur crbcyr.

13:10 Naq gubh funyg fgbar uvz jvgu fgbarf, gung ur qvr; orpnhfr ur
ungu fbhtug gb guehfg gurr njnl sebz gur YBEQ gul Tbq, juvpu oebhtug
gurr bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, sebz gur ubhfr bs obaqntr.

13:11 Naq nyy Vfenry funyy urne, naq srne, naq funyy qb ab zber nal
fhpu jvpxrqarff nf guvf vf nzbat lbh.

13:12 Vs gubh funyg urne fnl va bar bs gul pvgvrf, juvpu gur YBEQ gul
Tbq ungu tvira gurr gb qjryy gurer, fnlvat, 13:13 Pregnva zra, gur
puvyqera bs Oryvny, ner tbar bhg sebz nzbat lbh, naq unir jvguqenja
gur vaunovgnagf bs gurve pvgl, fnlvat, Yrg hf tb naq freir bgure tbqf,
juvpu lr unir abg xabja; 13:14 Gura funyg gubh radhver, naq znxr
frnepu, naq nfx qvyvtragyl; naq, orubyq, vs vg or gehgu, naq gur guvat
pregnva, gung fhpu nobzvangvba vf jebhtug nzbat lbh; 13:15 Gubh funyg
fheryl fzvgr gur vaunovgnagf bs gung pvgl jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq,
qrfgeblvat vg hggreyl, naq nyy gung vf gurerva, naq gur pnggyr
gurerbs, jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq.

13:16 Naq gubh funyg tngure nyy gur fcbvy bs vg vagb gur zvqfg bs gur
fgerrg gurerbs, naq funyg ohea jvgu sver gur pvgl, naq nyy gur fcbvy
gurerbs rirel juvg, sbe gur YBEQ gul Tbq: naq vg funyy or na urnc sbe
rire; vg funyy abg or ohvyg ntnva.

13:17 Naq gurer funyy pyrnir abhtug bs gur phefrq guvat gb guvar unaq:
gung gur YBEQ znl ghea sebz gur svreprarff bs uvf natre, naq furj gurr
zrepl, naq unir pbzcnffvba hcba gurr, naq zhygvcyl gurr, nf ur ungu
fjbea hagb gul snguref; 13:18 Jura gubh funyg urnexra gb gur ibvpr bs
gur YBEQ gul Tbq, gb xrrc nyy uvf pbzznaqzragf juvpu V pbzznaq gurr
guvf qnl, gb qb gung juvpu vf evtug va gur rlrf bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq.

14:1 Lr ner gur puvyqera bs gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq: lr funyy abg phg
lbhefryirf, abe znxr nal onyqarff orgjrra lbhe rlrf sbe gur qrnq.

14:2 Sbe gubh neg na ubyl crbcyr hagb gur YBEQ gul Tbq, naq gur YBEQ
ungu pubfra gurr gb or n crphyvne crbcyr hagb uvzfrys, nobir nyy gur
angvbaf gung ner hcba gur rnegu.

14:3 Gubh funyg abg rng nal nobzvanoyr guvat.

14:4 Gurfr ner gur ornfgf juvpu lr funyy rng: gur bk, gur furrc, naq
gur tbng, 14:5 Gur uneg, naq gur ebrohpx, naq gur snyybj qrre, naq gur
jvyq tbng, naq gur cltnet, naq gur jvyq bk, naq gur punzbvf.

14:6 Naq rirel ornfg gung cnegrgu gur ubbs, naq pyrnirgu gur pyrsg
vagb gjb pynjf, naq purjrgu gur phq nzbat gur ornfgf, gung lr funyy
rng.

14:7 Arireguryrff gurfr lr funyy abg rng bs gurz gung purj gur phq, be
bs gurz gung qvivqr gur pybira ubbs; nf gur pnzry, naq gur uner, naq
gur pbarl: sbe gurl purj gur phq, ohg qvivqr abg gur ubbs; gurersber
gurl ner hapyrna hagb lbh.

14:8 Naq gur fjvar, orpnhfr vg qvivqrgu gur ubbs, lrg purjrgu abg gur
phq, vg vf hapyrna hagb lbh: lr funyy abg rng bs gurve syrfu, abe
gbhpu gurve qrnq pnepnfr.

14:9 Gurfr lr funyy rng bs nyy gung ner va gur jngref: nyy gung unir
svaf naq fpnyrf funyy lr rng: 14:10 Naq jungfbrire ungu abg svaf naq
fpnyrf lr znl abg rng; vg vf hapyrna hagb lbh.

14:11 Bs nyy pyrna oveqf lr funyy rng.

14:12 Ohg gurfr ner gurl bs juvpu lr funyy abg rng: gur rntyr, naq gur
bffvsentr, naq gur bfcenl, 14:13 Naq gur tyrqr, naq gur xvgr, naq gur
ihygher nsgre uvf xvaq, 14:14 Naq rirel enira nsgre uvf xvaq, 14:15
Naq gur bjy, naq gur avtug unjx, naq gur phpxbj, naq gur unjx nsgre
uvf xvaq, 14:16 Gur yvggyr bjy, naq gur terng bjy, naq gur fjna, 14:17
Naq gur cryvpna, naq gur tvre rntyr, naq gur pbezbenag, 14:18 Naq gur
fgbex, naq gur ureba nsgre ure xvaq, naq gur yncjvat, naq gur ong.

14:19 Naq rirel perrcvat guvat gung syvrgu vf hapyrna hagb lbh: gurl
funyy abg or rngra.

14:20 Ohg bs nyy pyrna sbjyf lr znl rng.

14:21 Lr funyy abg rng bs nalguvat gung qvrgu bs vgfrys: gubh funyg
tvir vg hagb gur fgenatre gung vf va gul tngrf, gung ur znl rng vg; be
gubh znlrfg fryy vg hagb na nyvra: sbe gubh neg na ubyl crbcyr hagb
gur YBEQ gul Tbq.

Gubh funyg abg frrgur n xvq va uvf zbgure'f zvyx.

14:22 Gubh funyg gehyl gvgur nyy gur vapernfr bs gul frrq, gung gur
svryq oevatrgu sbegu lrne ol lrne.

14:23 Naq gubh funyg rng orsber gur YBEQ gul Tbq, va gur cynpr juvpu
ur funyy pubbfr gb cynpr uvf anzr gurer, gur gvgur bs gul pbea, bs gul
jvar, naq bs guvar bvy, naq gur svefgyvatf bs gul ureqf naq bs gul
sybpxf; gung gubh znlrfg yrnea gb srne gur YBEQ gul Tbq nyjnlf.

14:24 Naq vs gur jnl or gbb ybat sbe gurr, fb gung gubh neg abg noyr
gb pneel vg; be vs gur cynpr or gbb sne sebz gurr, juvpu gur YBEQ gul
Tbq funyy pubbfr gb frg uvf anzr gurer, jura gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu
oyrffrq gurr: 14:25 Gura funyg gubh ghea vg vagb zbarl, naq ovaq hc
gur zbarl va guvar unaq, naq funyg tb hagb gur cynpr juvpu gur YBEQ
gul Tbq funyy pubbfr: 14:26 Naq gubh funyg orfgbj gung zbarl sbe
jungfbrire gul fbhy yhfgrgu nsgre, sbe bkra, be sbe furrc, be sbe
jvar, be sbe fgebat qevax, be sbe jungfbrire gul fbhy qrfvergu: naq
gubh funyg rng gurer orsber gur YBEQ gul Tbq, naq gubh funyg erwbvpr,
gubh, naq guvar ubhfrubyq, 14:27 Naq gur Yrivgr gung vf jvguva gul
tngrf; gubh funyg abg sbefnxr uvz; sbe ur ungu ab cneg abe vaurevgnapr
jvgu gurr.

14:28 Ng gur raq bs guerr lrnef gubh funyg oevat sbegu nyy gur gvgur
bs guvar vapernfr gur fnzr lrne, naq funyg ynl vg hc jvguva gul tngrf:
14:29 Naq gur Yrivgr, (orpnhfr ur ungu ab cneg abe vaurevgnapr jvgu
gurr,) naq gur fgenatre, naq gur sngureyrff, naq gur jvqbj, juvpu ner
jvguva gul tngrf, funyy pbzr, naq funyy rng naq or fngvfsvrq; gung gur
YBEQ gul Tbq znl oyrff gurr va nyy gur jbex bs guvar unaq juvpu gubh
qbrfg.

15:1 Ng gur raq bs rirel frira lrnef gubh funyg znxr n eryrnfr.

15:2 Naq guvf vf gur znaare bs gur eryrnfr: Rirel perqvgbe gung
yraqrgu bhtug hagb uvf arvtuobhe funyy eryrnfr vg; ur funyy abg rknpg
vg bs uvf arvtuobhe, be bs uvf oebgure; orpnhfr vg vf pnyyrq gur
YBEQ'f eryrnfr.

15:3 Bs n sbervtare gubh znlrfg rknpg vg ntnva: ohg gung juvpu vf
guvar jvgu gul oebgure guvar unaq funyy eryrnfr; 15:4 Fnir jura gurer
funyy or ab cbbe nzbat lbh; sbe gur YBEQ funyy terngyl oyrff gurr va
gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu gurr sbe na vaurevgnapr gb
cbffrff vg: 15:5 Bayl vs gubh pnershyyl urnexra hagb gur ibvpr bs gur
YBEQ gul Tbq, gb bofreir gb qb nyy gurfr pbzznaqzragf juvpu V pbzznaq
gurr guvf qnl.

15:6 Sbe gur YBEQ gul Tbq oyrffrgu gurr, nf ur cebzvfrq gurr: naq gubh
funyg yraq hagb znal angvbaf, ohg gubh funyg abg obeebj; naq gubh
funyg ervta bire znal angvbaf, ohg gurl funyy abg ervta bire gurr.

15:7 Vs gurer or nzbat lbh n cbbe zna bs bar bs gul oerguera jvguva
nal bs gul tngrf va gul ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu gurr, gubh
funyg abg uneqra guvar urneg, abe fuhg guvar unaq sebz gul cbbe
oebgure: 15:8 Ohg gubh funyg bcra guvar unaq jvqr hagb uvz, naq funyg
fheryl yraq uvz fhssvpvrag sbe uvf arrq, va gung juvpu ur jnagrgu.

15:9 Orjner gung gurer or abg n gubhtug va gul jvpxrq urneg, fnlvat,
Gur friragu lrne, gur lrne bs eryrnfr, vf ng unaq; naq guvar rlr or
rivy ntnvafg gul cbbe oebgure, naq gubh tvirfg uvz abhtug; naq ur pel
hagb gur YBEQ ntnvafg gurr, naq vg or fva hagb gurr.

15:10 Gubh funyg fheryl tvir uvz, naq guvar urneg funyy abg or tevrirq
jura gubh tvirfg hagb uvz: orpnhfr gung sbe guvf guvat gur YBEQ gul
Tbq funyy oyrff gurr va nyy gul jbexf, naq va nyy gung gubh chggrfg
guvar unaq hagb.

15:11 Sbe gur cbbe funyy arire prnfr bhg bs gur ynaq: gurersber V
pbzznaq gurr, fnlvat, Gubh funyg bcra guvar unaq jvqr hagb gul
oebgure, gb gul cbbe, naq gb gul arrql, va gul ynaq.

15:12 Naq vs gul oebgure, na Uroerj zna, be na Uroerj jbzna, or fbyq
hagb gurr, naq freir gurr fvk lrnef; gura va gur friragu lrne gubh
funyg yrg uvz tb serr sebz gurr.

15:13 Naq jura gubh fraqrfg uvz bhg serr sebz gurr, gubh funyg abg yrg
uvz tb njnl rzcgl: 15:14 Gubh funyg sheavfu uvz yvorenyyl bhg bs gul
sybpx, naq bhg bs gul sybbe, naq bhg bs gul jvarcerff: bs gung
jurerjvgu gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu oyrffrq gurr gubh funyg tvir hagb uvz.

15:15 Naq gubh funyg erzrzore gung gubh jnfg n obaqzna va gur ynaq bs
Rtlcg, naq gur YBEQ gul Tbq erqrrzrq gurr: gurersber V pbzznaq gurr
guvf guvat gb qnl.

15:16 Naq vg funyy or, vs ur fnl hagb gurr, V jvyy abg tb njnl sebz
gurr; orpnhfr ur ybirgu gurr naq guvar ubhfr, orpnhfr ur vf jryy jvgu
gurr; 15:17 Gura gubh funyg gnxr na nhy, naq guehfg vg guebhtu uvf rne
hagb gur qbbe, naq ur funyy or gul freinag sbe rire. Naq nyfb hagb gul
znvqfreinag gubh funyg qb yvxrjvfr.

15:18 Vg funyy abg frrz uneq hagb gurr, jura gubh fraqrfg uvz njnl
serr sebz gurr; sbe ur ungu orra jbegu n qbhoyr uverq freinag gb gurr,
va freivat gurr fvk lrnef: naq gur YBEQ gul Tbq funyy oyrff gurr va
nyy gung gubh qbrfg.

15:19 Nyy gur svefgyvat znyrf gung pbzr bs gul ureq naq bs gul sybpx
gubh funyg fnapgvsl hagb gur YBEQ gul Tbq: gubh funyg qb ab jbex jvgu
gur svefgyvat bs gul ohyybpx, abe furne gur svefgyvat bs gul furrc.

15:20 Gubh funyg rng vg orsber gur YBEQ gul Tbq lrne ol lrne va gur
cynpr juvpu gur YBEQ funyy pubbfr, gubh naq gul ubhfrubyq.

15:21 Naq vs gurer or nal oyrzvfu gurerva, nf vs vg or ynzr, be oyvaq,
be unir nal vyy oyrzvfu, gubh funyg abg fnpevsvpr vg hagb gur YBEQ gul
Tbq.

15:22 Gubh funyg rng vg jvguva gul tngrf: gur hapyrna naq gur pyrna
crefba funyy rng vg nyvxr, nf gur ebrohpx, naq nf gur uneg.

15:23 Bayl gubh funyg abg rng gur oybbq gurerbs; gubh funyg cbhe vg
hcba gur tebhaq nf jngre.

16:1 Bofreir gur zbagu bs Novo, naq xrrc gur cnffbire hagb gur YBEQ
gul Tbq: sbe va gur zbagu bs Novo gur YBEQ gul Tbq oebhtug gurr sbegu
bhg bs Rtlcg ol avtug.

16:2 Gubh funyg gurersber fnpevsvpr gur cnffbire hagb gur YBEQ gul
Tbq, bs gur sybpx naq gur ureq, va gur cynpr juvpu gur YBEQ funyy
pubbfr gb cynpr uvf anzr gurer.

16:3 Gubh funyg rng ab yrnirarq oernq jvgu vg; frira qnlf funyg gubh
rng hayrnirarq oernq gurerjvgu, rira gur oernq bs nssyvpgvba; sbe gubh
pnzrfg sbegu bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg va unfgr: gung gubh znlrfg
erzrzore gur qnl jura gubh pnzrfg sbegu bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg nyy
gur qnlf bs gul yvsr.

16:4 Naq gurer funyy or ab yrnirarq oernq frra jvgu gurr va nyy gul
pbnfg frira qnlf; arvgure funyy gurer nal guvat bs gur syrfu, juvpu
gubh fnpevsvprqfg gur svefg qnl ng rira, erznva nyy avtug hagvy gur
zbeavat.

16:5 Gubh znlrfg abg fnpevsvpr gur cnffbire jvguva nal bs gul tngrf,
juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu gurr: 16:6 Ohg ng gur cynpr juvpu gur
YBEQ gul Tbq funyy pubbfr gb cynpr uvf anzr va, gurer gubh funyg
fnpevsvpr gur cnffbire ng rira, ng gur tbvat qbja bs gur fha, ng gur
frnfba gung gubh pnzrfg sbegu bhg bs Rtlcg.

16:7 Naq gubh funyg ebnfg naq rng vg va gur cynpr juvpu gur YBEQ gul
Tbq funyy pubbfr: naq gubh funyg ghea va gur zbeavat, naq tb hagb gul
gragf.

16:8 Fvk qnlf gubh funyg rng hayrnirarq oernq: naq ba gur friragu qnl
funyy or n fbyrza nffrzoyl gb gur YBEQ gul Tbq: gubh funyg qb ab jbex
gurerva.

16:9 Frira jrrxf funyg gubh ahzore hagb gurr: ortva gb ahzore gur
frira jrrxf sebz fhpu gvzr nf gubh ortvaarfg gb chg gur fvpxyr gb gur
pbea.

16:10 Naq gubh funyg xrrc gur srnfg bs jrrxf hagb gur YBEQ gul Tbq
jvgu n gevohgr bs n serrjvyy bssrevat bs guvar unaq, juvpu gubh funyg
tvir hagb gur YBEQ gul Tbq, nppbeqvat nf gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu oyrffrq
gurr: 16:11 Naq gubh funyg erwbvpr orsber gur YBEQ gul Tbq, gubh, naq
gul fba, naq gul qnhtugre, naq gul znafreinag, naq gul znvqfreinag,
naq gur Yrivgr gung vf jvguva gul tngrf, naq gur fgenatre, naq gur
sngureyrff, naq gur jvqbj, gung ner nzbat lbh, va gur cynpr juvpu gur
YBEQ gul Tbq ungu pubfra gb cynpr uvf anzr gurer.

16:12 Naq gubh funyg erzrzore gung gubh jnfg n obaqzna va Rtlcg: naq
gubh funyg bofreir naq qb gurfr fgnghgrf.

16:13 Gubh funyg bofreir gur srnfg bs gnoreanpyrf frira qnlf, nsgre
gung gubh unfg tngurerq va gul pbea naq gul jvar: 16:14 Naq gubh funyg
erwbvpr va gul srnfg, gubh, naq gul fba, naq gul qnhtugre, naq gul
znafreinag, naq gul znvqfreinag, naq gur Yrivgr, gur fgenatre, naq gur
sngureyrff, naq gur jvqbj, gung ner jvguva gul tngrf.

16:15 Frira qnlf funyg gubh xrrc n fbyrza srnfg hagb gur YBEQ gul Tbq
va gur cynpr juvpu gur YBEQ funyy pubbfr: orpnhfr gur YBEQ gul Tbq
funyy oyrff gurr va nyy guvar vapernfr, naq va nyy gur jbexf bs guvar
unaqf, gurersber gubh funyg fheryl erwbvpr.

16:16 Guerr gvzrf va n lrne funyy nyy gul znyrf nccrne orsber gur YBEQ
gul Tbq va gur cynpr juvpu ur funyy pubbfr; va gur srnfg bs hayrnirarq
oernq, naq va gur srnfg bs jrrxf, naq va gur srnfg bs gnoreanpyrf: naq
gurl funyy abg nccrne orsber gur YBEQ rzcgl: 16:17 Rirel zna funyy
tvir nf ur vf noyr, nppbeqvat gb gur oyrffvat bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq
juvpu ur ungu tvira gurr.

16:18 Whqtrf naq bssvpref funyg gubh znxr gurr va nyy gul tngrf, juvpu
gur YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu gurr, guebhtubhg gul gevorf: naq gurl funyy
whqtr gur crbcyr jvgu whfg whqtzrag.

16:19 Gubh funyg abg jerfg whqtzrag; gubh funyg abg erfcrpg crefbaf,
arvgure gnxr n tvsg: sbe n tvsg qbgu oyvaq gur rlrf bs gur jvfr, naq
creireg gur jbeqf bs gur evtugrbhf.

16:20 Gung juvpu vf nygbtrgure whfg funyg gubh sbyybj, gung gubh
znlrfg yvir, naq vaurevg gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu gurr.

16:21 Gubh funyg abg cynag gurr n tebir bs nal gerrf arne hagb gur
nygne bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq, juvpu gubh funyg znxr gurr.

16:22 Arvgure funyg gubh frg gurr hc nal vzntr; juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq
ungrgu.

17:1 Gubh funyg abg fnpevsvpr hagb gur YBEQ gul Tbq nal ohyybpx, be
furrc, jurerva vf oyrzvfu, be nal rivysnibherqarff: sbe gung vf na
nobzvangvba hagb gur YBEQ gul Tbq.

17:2 Vs gurer or sbhaq nzbat lbh, jvguva nal bs gul tngrf juvpu gur
YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu gurr, zna be jbzna, gung ungu jebhtug jvpxrqarff
va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq, va genafterffvat uvf pbiranag, 17:3
Naq ungu tbar naq freirq bgure tbqf, naq jbefuvccrq gurz, rvgure gur
fha, be zbba, be nal bs gur ubfg bs urnira, juvpu V unir abg
pbzznaqrq; 17:4 Naq vg or gbyq gurr, naq gubh unfg urneq bs vg, naq
radhverq qvyvtragyl, naq, orubyq, vg or gehr, naq gur guvat pregnva,
gung fhpu nobzvangvba vf jebhtug va Vfenry: 17:5 Gura funyg gubh oevat
sbegu gung zna be gung jbzna, juvpu unir pbzzvggrq gung jvpxrq guvat,
hagb gul tngrf, rira gung zna be gung jbzna, naq funyg fgbar gurz jvgu
fgbarf, gvyy gurl qvr.

17:6 Ng gur zbhgu bs gjb jvgarffrf, be guerr jvgarffrf, funyy ur gung
vf jbegul bs qrngu or chg gb qrngu; ohg ng gur zbhgu bs bar jvgarff ur
funyy abg or chg gb qrngu.

17:7 Gur unaqf bs gur jvgarffrf funyy or svefg hcba uvz gb chg uvz gb
qrngu, naq nsgrejneq gur unaqf bs nyy gur crbcyr. Fb gubh funyg chg
gur rivy njnl sebz nzbat lbh.

17:8 Vs gurer nevfr n znggre gbb uneq sbe gurr va whqtzrag, orgjrra
oybbq naq oybbq, orgjrra cyrn naq cyrn, naq orgjrra fgebxr naq fgebxr,
orvat znggref bs pbagebirefl jvguva gul tngrf: gura funyg gubh nevfr,
naq trg gurr hc vagb gur cynpr juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq funyy pubbfr;
17:9 Naq gubh funyg pbzr hagb gur cevrfgf gur Yrivgrf, naq hagb gur
whqtr gung funyy or va gubfr qnlf, naq radhver; naq gurl funyy furj
gurr gur fragrapr bs whqtzrag: 17:10 Naq gubh funyg qb nppbeqvat gb
gur fragrapr, juvpu gurl bs gung cynpr juvpu gur YBEQ funyy pubbfr
funyy furj gurr; naq gubh funyg bofreir gb qb nppbeqvat gb nyy gung
gurl vasbez gurr: 17:11 Nppbeqvat gb gur fragrapr bs gur ynj juvpu
gurl funyy grnpu gurr, naq nppbeqvat gb gur whqtzrag juvpu gurl funyy
gryy gurr, gubh funyg qb: gubh funyg abg qrpyvar sebz gur fragrapr
juvpu gurl funyy furj gurr, gb gur evtug unaq, abe gb gur yrsg.

17:12 Naq gur zna gung jvyy qb cerfhzcghbhfyl, naq jvyy abg urnexra
hagb gur cevrfg gung fgnaqrgu gb zvavfgre gurer orsber gur YBEQ gul
Tbq, be hagb gur whqtr, rira gung zna funyy qvr: naq gubh funyg chg
njnl gur rivy sebz Vfenry.

17:13 Naq nyy gur crbcyr funyy urne, naq srne, naq qb ab zber
cerfhzcghbhfyl.

17:14 Jura gubh neg pbzr hagb gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu
gurr, naq funyg cbffrff vg, naq funyg qjryy gurerva, naq funyg fnl, V
jvyy frg n xvat bire zr, yvxr nf nyy gur angvbaf gung ner nobhg zr;
17:15 Gubh funyg va nal jvfr frg uvz xvat bire gurr, jubz gur YBEQ gul
Tbq funyy pubbfr: bar sebz nzbat gul oerguera funyg gubh frg xvat bire
gurr: gubh znlrfg abg frg n fgenatre bire gurr, juvpu vf abg gul
oebgure.

17:16 Ohg ur funyy abg zhygvcyl ubefrf gb uvzfrys, abe pnhfr gur
crbcyr gb erghea gb Rtlcg, gb gur raq gung ur fubhyq zhygvcyl ubefrf:
sbenfzhpu nf gur YBEQ ungu fnvq hagb lbh, Lr funyy uraprsbegu erghea
ab zber gung jnl.

17:17 Arvgure funyy ur zhygvcyl jvirf gb uvzfrys, gung uvf urneg ghea
abg njnl: arvgure funyy ur terngyl zhygvcyl gb uvzfrys fvyire naq
tbyq.

17:18 Naq vg funyy or, jura ur fvggrgu hcba gur guebar bs uvf xvatqbz,
gung ur funyy jevgr uvz n pbcl bs guvf ynj va n obbx bhg bs gung juvpu
vf orsber gur cevrfgf gur Yrivgrf: 17:19 Naq vg funyy or jvgu uvz, naq
ur funyy ernq gurerva nyy gur qnlf bs uvf yvsr: gung ur znl yrnea gb
srne gur YBEQ uvf Tbq, gb xrrc nyy gur jbeqf bs guvf ynj naq gurfr
fgnghgrf, gb qb gurz: 17:20 Gung uvf urneg or abg yvsgrq hc nobir uvf
oerguera, naq gung ur ghea abg nfvqr sebz gur pbzznaqzrag, gb gur
evtug unaq, be gb gur yrsg: gb gur raq gung ur znl cebybat uvf qnlf va
uvf xvatqbz, ur, naq uvf puvyqera, va gur zvqfg bs Vfenry.

18:1 Gur cevrfgf gur Yrivgrf, naq nyy gur gevor bs Yriv, funyy unir ab
cneg abe vaurevgnapr jvgu Vfenry: gurl funyy rng gur bssrevatf bs gur
YBEQ znqr ol sver, naq uvf vaurevgnapr.

18:2 Gurersber funyy gurl unir ab vaurevgnapr nzbat gurve oerguera:
gur YBEQ vf gurve vaurevgnapr, nf ur ungu fnvq hagb gurz.

18:3 Naq guvf funyy or gur cevrfg'f qhr sebz gur crbcyr, sebz gurz
gung bssre n fnpevsvpr, jurgure vg or bk be furrc; naq gurl funyy tvir
hagb gur cevrfg gur fubhyqre, naq gur gjb purrxf, naq gur znj.

18:4 Gur svefgsehvg nyfb bs gul pbea, bs gul jvar, naq bs guvar bvy,
naq gur svefg bs gur syrrpr bs gul furrc, funyg gubh tvir uvz.

18:5 Sbe gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu pubfra uvz bhg bs nyy gul gevorf, gb
fgnaq gb zvavfgre va gur anzr bs gur YBEQ, uvz naq uvf fbaf sbe rire.

18:6 Naq vs n Yrivgr pbzr sebz nal bs gul tngrf bhg bs nyy Vfenry,
jurer ur fbwbhearq, naq pbzr jvgu nyy gur qrfver bs uvf zvaq hagb gur
cynpr juvpu gur YBEQ funyy pubbfr; 18:7 Gura ur funyy zvavfgre va gur
anzr bs gur YBEQ uvf Tbq, nf nyy uvf oerguera gur Yrivgrf qb, juvpu
fgnaq gurer orsber gur YBEQ.

18:8 Gurl funyy unir yvxr cbegvbaf gb rng, orfvqr gung juvpu pbzrgu bs
gur fnyr bs uvf cngevzbal.

18:9 Jura gubh neg pbzr vagb gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu
gurr, gubh funyg abg yrnea gb qb nsgre gur nobzvangvbaf bs gubfr
angvbaf.

18:10 Gurer funyy abg or sbhaq nzbat lbh nal bar gung znxrgu uvf fba
be uvf qnhtugre gb cnff guebhtu gur sver, be gung hfrgu qvivangvba, be
na bofreire bs gvzrf, be na rapunagre, be n jvgpu.

18:11 Be n punezre, be n pbafhygre jvgu snzvyvne fcvevgf, be n jvmneq,
be n arpebznapre.

18:12 Sbe nyy gung qb gurfr guvatf ner na nobzvangvba hagb gur YBEQ:
naq orpnhfr bs gurfr nobzvangvbaf gur YBEQ gul Tbq qbgu qevir gurz bhg
sebz orsber gurr.

18:13 Gubh funyg or cresrpg jvgu gur YBEQ gul Tbq.

18:14 Sbe gurfr angvbaf, juvpu gubh funyg cbffrff, urnexrarq hagb
bofreiref bs gvzrf, naq hagb qvivaref: ohg nf sbe gurr, gur YBEQ gul
Tbq ungu abg fhssrerq gurr fb gb qb.

18:15 Gur YBEQ gul Tbq jvyy envfr hc hagb gurr n Cebcurg sebz gur
zvqfg bs gurr, bs gul oerguera, yvxr hagb zr; hagb uvz lr funyy
urnexra; 18:16 Nppbeqvat gb nyy gung gubh qrfverqfg bs gur YBEQ gul
Tbq va Ubero va gur qnl bs gur nffrzoyl, fnlvat, Yrg zr abg urne ntnva
gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ zl Tbq, arvgure yrg zr frr guvf terng sver nal
zber, gung V qvr abg.

18:17 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb zr, Gurl unir jryy fcbxra gung juvpu gurl
unir fcbxra.

18:18 V jvyy envfr gurz hc n Cebcurg sebz nzbat gurve oerguera, yvxr
hagb gurr, naq jvyy chg zl jbeqf va uvf zbhgu; naq ur funyy fcrnx hagb
gurz nyy gung V funyy pbzznaq uvz.

18:19 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, gung jubfbrire jvyy abg urnexra hagb
zl jbeqf juvpu ur funyy fcrnx va zl anzr, V jvyy erdhver vg bs uvz.

18:20 Ohg gur cebcurg, juvpu funyy cerfhzr gb fcrnx n jbeq va zl anzr,
juvpu V unir abg pbzznaqrq uvz gb fcrnx, be gung funyy fcrnx va gur
anzr bs bgure tbqf, rira gung cebcurg funyy qvr.

18:21 Naq vs gubh fnl va guvar urneg, Ubj funyy jr xabj gur jbeq juvpu
gur YBEQ ungu abg fcbxra?  18:22 Jura n cebcurg fcrnxrgu va gur anzr
bs gur YBEQ, vs gur guvat sbyybj abg, abe pbzr gb cnff, gung vf gur
guvat juvpu gur YBEQ ungu abg fcbxra, ohg gur cebcurg ungu fcbxra vg
cerfhzcghbhfyl: gubh funyg abg or nsenvq bs uvz.

19:1 Jura gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu phg bss gur angvbaf, jubfr ynaq gur
YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu gurr, naq gubh fhpprrqrfg gurz, naq qjryyrfg va
gurve pvgvrf, naq va gurve ubhfrf; 19:2 Gubh funyg frcnengr guerr
pvgvrf sbe gurr va gur zvqfg bs gul ynaq, juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq
tvirgu gurr gb cbffrff vg.

19:3 Gubh funyg cercner gurr n jnl, naq qvivqr gur pbnfgf bs gul ynaq,
juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu gurr gb vaurevg, vagb guerr cnegf, gung
rirel fynlre znl syrr guvgure.

19:4 Naq guvf vf gur pnfr bs gur fynlre, juvpu funyy syrr guvgure,
gung ur znl yvir: Jubfb xvyyrgu uvf arvtuobhe vtabenagyl, jubz ur
ungrq abg va gvzr cnfg; 19:5 Nf jura n zna tbrgu vagb gur jbbq jvgu
uvf arvtuobhe gb urj jbbq, naq uvf unaq srgpurgu n fgebxr jvgu gur nkr
gb phg qbja gur gerr, naq gur urnq fyvccrgu sebz gur uryir, naq
yvtugrgu hcba uvf arvtuobhe, gung ur qvr; ur funyy syrr hagb bar bs
gubfr pvgvrf, naq yvir: 19:6 Yrfg gur niratre bs gur oybbq chefhr gur
fynlre, juvyr uvf urneg vf ubg, naq biregnxr uvz, orpnhfr gur jnl vf
ybat, naq fynl uvz; jurernf ur jnf abg jbegul bs qrngu, vanfzhpu nf ur
ungrq uvz abg va gvzr cnfg.

19:7 Jurersber V pbzznaq gurr, fnlvat, Gubh funyg frcnengr guerr
pvgvrf sbe gurr.

19:8 Naq vs gur YBEQ gul Tbq raynetr gul pbnfg, nf ur ungu fjbea hagb
gul snguref, naq tvir gurr nyy gur ynaq juvpu ur cebzvfrq gb tvir hagb
gul snguref; 19:9 Vs gubh funyg xrrc nyy gurfr pbzznaqzragf gb qb
gurz, juvpu V pbzznaq gurr guvf qnl, gb ybir gur YBEQ gul Tbq, naq gb
jnyx rire va uvf jnlf; gura funyg gubh nqq guerr pvgvrf zber sbe gurr,
orfvqr gurfr guerr: 19:10 Gung vaabprag oybbq or abg furq va gul ynaq,
juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu gurr sbe na vaurevgnapr, naq fb oybbq or
hcba gurr.

19:11 Ohg vs nal zna ungr uvf arvtuobhe, naq yvr va jnvg sbe uvz, naq
evfr hc ntnvafg uvz, naq fzvgr uvz zbegnyyl gung ur qvr, naq syrrgu
vagb bar bs gurfr pvgvrf: 19:12 Gura gur ryqref bs uvf pvgl funyy fraq
naq srgpu uvz gurapr, naq qryvire uvz vagb gur unaq bs gur niratre bs
oybbq, gung ur znl qvr.

19:13 Guvar rlr funyy abg cvgl uvz, ohg gubh funyg chg njnl gur thvyg
bs vaabprag oybbq sebz Vfenry, gung vg znl tb jryy jvgu gurr.

19:14 Gubh funyg abg erzbir gul arvtuobhe'f ynaqznex, juvpu gurl bs
byq gvzr unir frg va guvar vaurevgnapr, juvpu gubh funyg vaurevg va
gur ynaq gung gur YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu gurr gb cbffrff vg.

19:15 Bar jvgarff funyy abg evfr hc ntnvafg n zna sbe nal vavdhvgl, be
sbe nal fva, va nal fva gung ur fvaargu: ng gur zbhgu bs gjb
jvgarffrf, be ng gur zbhgu bs guerr jvgarffrf, funyy gur znggre or
rfgnoyvfurq.

19:16 Vs n snyfr jvgarff evfr hc ntnvafg nal zna gb grfgvsl ntnvafg
uvz gung juvpu vf jebat; 19:17 Gura obgu gur zra, orgjrra jubz gur
pbagebirefl vf, funyy fgnaq orsber gur YBEQ, orsber gur cevrfgf naq
gur whqtrf, juvpu funyy or va gubfr qnlf; 19:18 Naq gur whqtrf funyy
znxr qvyvtrag vadhvfvgvba: naq, orubyq, vs gur jvgarff or n snyfr
jvgarff, naq ungu grfgvsvrq snyfryl ntnvafg uvf oebgure; 19:19 Gura
funyy lr qb hagb uvz, nf ur unq gubhtug gb unir qbar hagb uvf oebgure:
fb funyg gubh chg gur rivy njnl sebz nzbat lbh.

19:20 Naq gubfr juvpu erznva funyy urne, naq srne, naq funyy
uraprsbegu pbzzvg ab zber nal fhpu rivy nzbat lbh.

19:21 Naq guvar rlr funyy abg cvgl; ohg yvsr funyy tb sbe yvsr, rlr
sbe rlr, gbbgu sbe gbbgu, unaq sbe unaq, sbbg sbe sbbg.

20:1 Jura gubh tbrfg bhg gb onggyr ntnvafg guvar rarzvrf, naq frrfg
ubefrf, naq punevbgf, naq n crbcyr zber guna gubh, or abg nsenvq bs
gurz: sbe gur YBEQ gul Tbq vf jvgu gurr, juvpu oebhtug gurr hc bhg bs
gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

20:2 Naq vg funyy or, jura lr ner pbzr avtu hagb gur onggyr, gung gur
cevrfg funyy nccebnpu naq fcrnx hagb gur crbcyr, 20:3 Naq funyy fnl
hagb gurz, Urne, B Vfenry, lr nccebnpu guvf qnl hagb onggyr ntnvafg
lbhe rarzvrf: yrg abg lbhe urnegf snvag, srne abg, naq qb abg gerzoyr,
arvgure or lr greevsvrq orpnhfr bs gurz; 20:4 Sbe gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq vf
ur gung tbrgu jvgu lbh, gb svtug sbe lbh ntnvafg lbhe rarzvrf, gb fnir
lbh.

20:5 Naq gur bssvpref funyy fcrnx hagb gur crbcyr, fnlvat, Jung zna vf
gurer gung ungu ohvyg n arj ubhfr, naq ungu abg qrqvpngrq vg? yrg uvz
tb naq erghea gb uvf ubhfr, yrfg ur qvr va gur onggyr, naq nabgure zna
qrqvpngr vg.

20:6 Naq jung zna vf ur gung ungu cynagrq n ivarlneq, naq ungu abg lrg
rngra bs vg? yrg uvz nyfb tb naq erghea hagb uvf ubhfr, yrfg ur qvr va
gur onggyr, naq nabgure zna rng bs vg.

20:7 Naq jung zna vf gurer gung ungu orgebgurq n jvsr, naq ungu abg
gnxra ure? yrg uvz tb naq erghea hagb uvf ubhfr, yrfg ur qvr va gur
onggyr, naq nabgure zna gnxr ure.

20:8 Naq gur bssvpref funyy fcrnx shegure hagb gur crbcyr, naq gurl
funyy fnl, Jung zna vf gurer gung vf srneshy naq snvagurnegrq? yrg uvz
tb naq erghea hagb uvf ubhfr, yrfg uvf oerguera'f urneg snvag nf jryy
nf uvf urneg.

20:9 Naq vg funyy or, jura gur bssvpref unir znqr na raq bs fcrnxvat
hagb gur crbcyr gung gurl funyy znxr pncgnvaf bs gur nezvrf gb yrnq
gur crbcyr.

20:10 Jura gubh pbzrfg avtu hagb n pvgl gb svtug ntnvafg vg, gura
cebpynvz crnpr hagb vg.

20:11 Naq vg funyy or, vs vg znxr gurr nafjre bs crnpr, naq bcra hagb
gurr, gura vg funyy or, gung nyy gur crbcyr gung vf sbhaq gurerva
funyy or gevohgnevrf hagb gurr, naq gurl funyy freir gurr.

20:12 Naq vs vg jvyy znxr ab crnpr jvgu gurr, ohg jvyy znxr jne
ntnvafg gurr, gura gubh funyg orfvrtr vg: 20:13 Naq jura gur YBEQ gul
Tbq ungu qryvirerq vg vagb guvar unaqf, gubh funyg fzvgr rirel znyr
gurerbs jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq: 20:14 Ohg gur jbzra, naq gur
yvggyr barf, naq gur pnggyr, naq nyy gung vf va gur pvgl, rira nyy gur
fcbvy gurerbs, funyg gubh gnxr hagb gulfrys; naq gubh funyg rng gur
fcbvy bs guvar rarzvrf, juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu tvira gurr.

20:15 Guhf funyg gubh qb hagb nyy gur pvgvrf juvpu ner irel sne bss
sebz gurr, juvpu ner abg bs gur pvgvrf bs gurfr angvbaf.

20:16 Ohg bs gur pvgvrf bs gurfr crbcyr, juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq qbgu
tvir gurr sbe na vaurevgnapr, gubh funyg fnir nyvir abguvat gung
oerngurgu: 20:17 Ohg gubh funyg hggreyl qrfgebl gurz; anzryl, gur
Uvggvgrf, naq gur Nzbevgrf, gur Pnannavgrf, naq gur Crevmmvgrf, gur
Uvivgrf, naq gur Wrohfvgrf; nf gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu pbzznaqrq gurr:
20:18 Gung gurl grnpu lbh abg gb qb nsgre nyy gurve nobzvangvbaf,
juvpu gurl unir qbar hagb gurve tbqf; fb fubhyq lr fva ntnvafg gur
YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

20:19 Jura gubh funyg orfvrtr n pvgl n ybat gvzr, va znxvat jne
ntnvafg vg gb gnxr vg, gubh funyg abg qrfgebl gur gerrf gurerbs ol
sbepvat na nkr ntnvafg gurz: sbe gubh znlrfg rng bs gurz, naq gubh
funyg abg phg gurz qbja (sbe gur gerr bs gur svryq vf zna'f yvsr) gb
rzcybl gurz va gur fvrtr: 20:20 Bayl gur gerrf juvpu gubh xabjrfg gung
gurl or abg gerrf sbe zrng, gubh funyg qrfgebl naq phg gurz qbja; naq
gubh funyg ohvyq ohyjnexf ntnvafg gur pvgl gung znxrgu jne jvgu gurr,
hagvy vg or fhoqhrq.

21:1 Vs bar or sbhaq fynva va gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu
gurr gb cbffrff vg, ylvat va gur svryq, naq vg or abg xabja jub ungu
fynva uvz: 21:2 Gura gul ryqref naq gul whqtrf funyy pbzr sbegu, naq
gurl funyy zrnfher hagb gur pvgvrf juvpu ner ebhaq nobhg uvz gung vf
fynva: 21:3 Naq vg funyy or, gung gur pvgl juvpu vf arkg hagb gur
fynva zna, rira gur ryqref bs gung pvgl funyy gnxr na urvsre, juvpu
ungu abg orra jebhtug jvgu, naq juvpu ungu abg qenja va gur lbxr; 21:4
Naq gur ryqref bs gung pvgl funyy oevat qbja gur urvsre hagb n ebhtu
inyyrl, juvpu vf arvgure rnerq abe fbja, naq funyy fgevxr bss gur
urvsre'f arpx gurer va gur inyyrl: 21:5 Naq gur cevrfgf gur fbaf bs
Yriv funyy pbzr arne; sbe gurz gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu pubfra gb
zvavfgre hagb uvz, naq gb oyrff va gur anzr bs gur YBEQ; naq ol gurve
jbeq funyy rirel pbagebirefl naq rirel fgebxr or gevrq: 21:6 Naq nyy
gur ryqref bs gung pvgl, gung ner arkg hagb gur fynva zna, funyy jnfu
gurve unaqf bire gur urvsre gung vf orurnqrq va gur inyyrl: 21:7 Naq
gurl funyy nafjre naq fnl, Bhe unaqf unir abg furq guvf oybbq, arvgure
unir bhe rlrf frra vg.

21:8 Or zrepvshy, B YBEQ, hagb gul crbcyr Vfenry, jubz gubh unfg
erqrrzrq, naq ynl abg vaabprag oybbq hagb gul crbcyr bs Vfenry'f
punetr. Naq gur oybbq funyy or sbetvira gurz.

21:9 Fb funyg gubh chg njnl gur thvyg bs vaabprag oybbq sebz nzbat
lbh, jura gubh funyg qb gung juvpu vf evtug va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ.

21:10 Jura gubh tbrfg sbegu gb jne ntnvafg guvar rarzvrf, naq gur YBEQ
gul Tbq ungu qryvirerq gurz vagb guvar unaqf, naq gubh unfg gnxra gurz
pncgvir, 21:11 Naq frrfg nzbat gur pncgvirf n ornhgvshy jbzna, naq
unfg n qrfver hagb ure, gung gubh jbhyqrfg unir ure gb gul jvsr; 21:12
Gura gubh funyg oevat ure ubzr gb guvar ubhfr, naq fur funyy funir ure
urnq, naq cner ure anvyf; 21:13 Naq fur funyy chg gur envzrag bs ure
pncgvivgl sebz bss ure, naq funyy erznva va guvar ubhfr, naq orjnvy
ure sngure naq ure zbgure n shyy zbagu: naq nsgre gung gubh funyg tb
va hagb ure, naq or ure uhfonaq, naq fur funyy or gul jvsr.

21:14 Naq vg funyy or, vs gubh unir ab qryvtug va ure, gura gubh funyg
yrg ure tb juvgure fur jvyy; ohg gubh funyg abg fryy ure ng nyy sbe
zbarl, gubh funyg abg znxr zrepunaqvfr bs ure, orpnhfr gubh unfg
uhzoyrq ure.

21:15 Vs n zna unir gjb jvirf, bar orybirq, naq nabgure ungrq, naq
gurl unir obea uvz puvyqera, obgu gur orybirq naq gur ungrq; naq vs
gur svefgobea fba or uref gung jnf ungrq: 21:16 Gura vg funyy or, jura
ur znxrgu uvf fbaf gb vaurevg gung juvpu ur ungu, gung ur znl abg znxr
gur fba bs gur orybirq svefgobea orsber gur fba bs gur ungrq, juvpu vf
vaqrrq gur svefgobea: 21:17 Ohg ur funyy npxabjyrqtr gur fba bs gur
ungrq sbe gur svefgobea, ol tvivat uvz n qbhoyr cbegvba bs nyy gung ur
ungu: sbe ur vf gur ortvaavat bs uvf fgeratgu; gur evtug bs gur
svefgobea vf uvf.

21:18 Vs n zna unir n fghoobea naq eroryyvbhf fba, juvpu jvyy abg borl
gur ibvpr bs uvf sngure, be gur ibvpr bs uvf zbgure, naq gung, jura
gurl unir punfgrarq uvz, jvyy abg urnexra hagb gurz: 21:19 Gura funyy
uvf sngure naq uvf zbgure ynl ubyq ba uvz, naq oevat uvz bhg hagb gur
ryqref bs uvf pvgl, naq hagb gur tngr bs uvf cynpr; 21:20 Naq gurl
funyy fnl hagb gur ryqref bs uvf pvgl, Guvf bhe fba vf fghoobea naq
eroryyvbhf, ur jvyy abg borl bhe ibvpr; ur vf n tyhggba, naq n
qehaxneq.

21:21 Naq nyy gur zra bs uvf pvgl funyy fgbar uvz jvgu fgbarf, gung ur
qvr: fb funyg gubh chg rivy njnl sebz nzbat lbh; naq nyy Vfenry funyy
urne, naq srne.

21:22 Naq vs n zna unir pbzzvggrq n fva jbegul bs qrngu, naq ur or gb
or chg gb qrngu, naq gubh unat uvz ba n gerr: 21:23 Uvf obql funyy abg
erznva nyy avtug hcba gur gerr, ohg gubh funyg va nal jvfr ohel uvz
gung qnl; (sbe ur gung vf unatrq vf npphefrq bs Tbq;) gung gul ynaq or
abg qrsvyrq, juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu gurr sbe na vaurevgnapr.

22:1 Gubh funyg abg frr gul oebgure'f bk be uvf furrc tb nfgenl, naq
uvqr gulfrys sebz gurz: gubh funyg va nal pnfr oevat gurz ntnva hagb
gul oebgure.

22:2 Naq vs gul oebgure or abg avtu hagb gurr, be vs gubh xabj uvz
abg, gura gubh funyg oevat vg hagb guvar bja ubhfr, naq vg funyy or
jvgu gurr hagvy gul oebgure frrx nsgre vg, naq gubh funyg erfgber vg
gb uvz ntnva.

22:3 Va yvxr znaare funyg gubh qb jvgu uvf nff; naq fb funyg gubh qb
jvgu uvf envzrag; naq jvgu nyy ybfg guvat bs gul oebgure'f, juvpu ur
ungu ybfg, naq gubh unfg sbhaq, funyg gubh qb yvxrjvfr: gubh znlrfg
abg uvqr gulfrys.

22:4 Gubh funyg abg frr gul oebgure'f nff be uvf bk snyy qbja ol gur
jnl, naq uvqr gulfrys sebz gurz: gubh funyg fheryl uryc uvz gb yvsg
gurz hc ntnva.

22:5 Gur jbzna funyy abg jrne gung juvpu cregnvargu hagb n zna,
arvgure funyy n zna chg ba n jbzna'f tnezrag: sbe nyy gung qb fb ner
nobzvangvba hagb gur YBEQ gul Tbq.

22:6 Vs n oveq'f arfg punapr gb or orsber gurr va gur jnl va nal gerr,
be ba gur tebhaq, jurgure gurl or lbhat barf, be rttf, naq gur qnz
fvggvat hcba gur lbhat, be hcba gur rttf, gubh funyg abg gnxr gur qnz
jvgu gur lbhat: 22:7 Ohg gubh funyg va nal jvfr yrg gur qnz tb, naq
gnxr gur lbhat gb gurr; gung vg znl or jryy jvgu gurr, naq gung gubh
znlrfg cebybat gul qnlf.

22:8 Jura gubh ohvyqrfg n arj ubhfr, gura gubh funyg znxr n onggyrzrag
sbe gul ebbs, gung gubh oevat abg oybbq hcba guvar ubhfr, vs nal zna
snyy sebz gurapr.

22:9 Gubh funyg abg fbj gul ivarlneq jvgu qviref frrqf: yrfg gur sehvg
bs gul frrq juvpu gubh unfg fbja, naq gur sehvg bs gul ivarlneq, or
qrsvyrq.

22:10 Gubh funyg abg cybj jvgu na bk naq na nff gbtrgure.

22:11 Gubh funyg abg jrne n tnezrag bs qviref fbegf, nf bs jbbyyra naq
yvara gbtrgure.

22:12 Gubh funyg znxr gurr sevatrf hcba gur sbhe dhnegref bs gul
irfgher, jurerjvgu gubh pbirerfg gulfrys.

22:13 Vs nal zna gnxr n jvsr, naq tb va hagb ure, naq ungr ure, 22:14
Naq tvir bppnfvbaf bs fcrrpu ntnvafg ure, naq oevat hc na rivy anzr
hcba ure, naq fnl, V gbbx guvf jbzna, naq jura V pnzr gb ure, V sbhaq
ure abg n znvq: 22:15 Gura funyy gur sngure bs gur qnzfry, naq ure
zbgure, gnxr naq oevat sbegu gur gbxraf bs gur qnzfry'f ivetvavgl hagb
gur ryqref bs gur pvgl va gur tngr: 22:16 Naq gur qnzfry'f sngure
funyy fnl hagb gur ryqref, V tnir zl qnhtugre hagb guvf zna gb jvsr,
naq ur ungrgu ure; 22:17 Naq, yb, ur ungu tvira bppnfvbaf bs fcrrpu
ntnvafg ure, fnlvat, V sbhaq abg gul qnhtugre n znvq; naq lrg gurfr
ner gur gbxraf bs zl qnhtugre'f ivetvavgl. Naq gurl funyy fcernq gur
pybgu orsber gur ryqref bs gur pvgl.

22:18 Naq gur ryqref bs gung pvgl funyy gnxr gung zna naq punfgvfr
uvz; 22:19 Naq gurl funyy nzrepr uvz va na uhaqerq furxryf bs fvyire,
naq tvir gurz hagb gur sngure bs gur qnzfry, orpnhfr ur ungu oebhtug
hc na rivy anzr hcba n ivetva bs Vfenry: naq fur funyy or uvf jvsr; ur
znl abg chg ure njnl nyy uvf qnlf.

22:20 Ohg vs guvf guvat or gehr, naq gur gbxraf bs ivetvavgl or abg
sbhaq sbe gur qnzfry: 22:21 Gura gurl funyy oevat bhg gur qnzfry gb
gur qbbe bs ure sngure'f ubhfr, naq gur zra bs ure pvgl funyy fgbar
ure jvgu fgbarf gung fur qvr: orpnhfr fur ungu jebhtug sbyyl va
Vfenry, gb cynl gur juber va ure sngure'f ubhfr: fb funyg gubh chg
rivy njnl sebz nzbat lbh.

22:22 Vs n zna or sbhaq ylvat jvgu n jbzna zneevrq gb na uhfonaq, gura
gurl funyy obgu bs gurz qvr, obgu gur zna gung ynl jvgu gur jbzna, naq
gur jbzna: fb funyg gubh chg njnl rivy sebz Vfenry.

22:23 Vs n qnzfry gung vf n ivetva or orgebgurq hagb na uhfonaq, naq n
zna svaq ure va gur pvgl, naq yvr jvgu ure; 22:24 Gura lr funyy oevat
gurz obgu bhg hagb gur tngr bs gung pvgl, naq lr funyy fgbar gurz jvgu
fgbarf gung gurl qvr; gur qnzfry, orpnhfr fur pevrq abg, orvat va gur
pvgl; naq gur zna, orpnhfr ur ungu uhzoyrq uvf arvtuobhe'f jvsr: fb
gubh funyg chg njnl rivy sebz nzbat lbh.

22:25 Ohg vs n zna svaq n orgebgurq qnzfry va gur svryq, naq gur zna
sbepr ure, naq yvr jvgu ure: gura gur zna bayl gung ynl jvgu ure funyy
qvr.

22:26 Ohg hagb gur qnzfry gubh funyg qb abguvat; gurer vf va gur
qnzfry ab fva jbegul bs qrngu: sbe nf jura n zna evfrgu ntnvafg uvf
arvtuobhe, naq fynlrgu uvz, rira fb vf guvf znggre: 22:27 Sbe ur sbhaq
ure va gur svryq, naq gur orgebgurq qnzfry pevrq, naq gurer jnf abar
gb fnir ure.

22:28 Vs n zna svaq n qnzfry gung vf n ivetva, juvpu vf abg orgebgurq,
naq ynl ubyq ba ure, naq yvr jvgu ure, naq gurl or sbhaq; 22:29 Gura
gur zna gung ynl jvgu ure funyy tvir hagb gur qnzfry'f sngure svsgl
furxryf bs fvyire, naq fur funyy or uvf jvsr; orpnhfr ur ungu uhzoyrq
ure, ur znl abg chg ure njnl nyy uvf qnlf.

22:30 N zna funyy abg gnxr uvf sngure'f jvsr, abe qvfpbire uvf
sngure'f fxveg.

23:1 Ur gung vf jbhaqrq va gur fgbarf, be ungu uvf cevil zrzore phg
bss, funyy abg ragre vagb gur pbatertngvba bs gur YBEQ.

23:2 N onfgneq funyy abg ragre vagb gur pbatertngvba bs gur YBEQ; rira
gb uvf gragu trarengvba funyy ur abg ragre vagb gur pbatertngvba bs
gur YBEQ.

23:3 Na Nzzbavgr be Zbnovgr funyy abg ragre vagb gur pbatertngvba bs
gur YBEQ; rira gb gurve gragu trarengvba funyy gurl abg ragre vagb gur
pbatertngvba bs gur YBEQ sbe rire: 23:4 Orpnhfr gurl zrg lbh abg jvgu
oernq naq jvgu jngre va gur jnl, jura lr pnzr sbegu bhg bs Rtlcg; naq
orpnhfr gurl uverq ntnvafg gurr Onynnz gur fba bs Orbe bs Crgube bs
Zrfbcbgnzvn, gb phefr gurr.

23:5 Arireguryrff gur YBEQ gul Tbq jbhyq abg urnexra hagb Onynnz; ohg
gur YBEQ gul Tbq ghearq gur phefr vagb n oyrffvat hagb gurr, orpnhfr
gur YBEQ gul Tbq ybirq gurr.

23:6 Gubh funyg abg frrx gurve crnpr abe gurve cebfcrevgl nyy gul qnlf
sbe rire.

23:7 Gubh funyg abg noube na Rqbzvgr; sbe ur vf gul oebgure: gubh
funyg abg noube na Rtlcgvna; orpnhfr gubh jnfg n fgenatre va uvf ynaq.

23:8 Gur puvyqera gung ner ortbggra bs gurz funyy ragre vagb gur
pbatertngvba bs gur YBEQ va gurve guveq trarengvba.

23:9 Jura gur ubfg tbrgu sbegu ntnvafg guvar rarzvrf, gura xrrc gurr
sebz rirel jvpxrq guvat.

23:10 Vs gurer or nzbat lbh nal zna, gung vf abg pyrna ol ernfba bs
hapyrnaarff gung punaprgu uvz ol avtug, gura funyy ur tb noebnq bhg bs
gur pnzc, ur funyy abg pbzr jvguva gur pnzc: 23:11 Ohg vg funyy or,
jura riravat pbzrgu ba, ur funyy jnfu uvzfrys jvgu jngre: naq jura gur
fha vf qbja, ur funyy pbzr vagb gur pnzc ntnva.

23:12 Gubh funyg unir n cynpr nyfb jvgubhg gur pnzc, juvgure gubh
funyg tb sbegu noebnq: 23:13 Naq gubh funyg unir n cnqqyr hcba gul
jrncba; naq vg funyy or, jura gubh jvyg rnfr gulfrys noebnq, gubh
funyg qvt gurerjvgu, naq funyg ghea onpx naq pbire gung juvpu pbzrgu
sebz gurr: 23:14 Sbe gur YBEQ gul Tbq jnyxrgu va gur zvqfg bs gul
pnzc, gb qryvire gurr, naq gb tvir hc guvar rarzvrf orsber gurr;
gurersber funyy gul pnzc or ubyl: gung ur frr ab hapyrna guvat va
gurr, naq ghea njnl sebz gurr.

23:15 Gubh funyg abg qryvire hagb uvf znfgre gur freinag juvpu vf
rfpncrq sebz uvf znfgre hagb gurr: 23:16 Ur funyy qjryy jvgu gurr,
rira nzbat lbh, va gung cynpr juvpu ur funyy pubbfr va bar bs gul
tngrf, jurer vg yvxrgu uvz orfg: gubh funyg abg bccerff uvz.

23:17 Gurer funyy or ab juber bs gur qnhtugref bs Vfenry, abe n
fbqbzvgr bs gur fbaf bs Vfenry.

23:18 Gubh funyg abg oevat gur uver bs n juber, be gur cevpr bs n qbt,
vagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq sbe nal ibj: sbe rira obgu gurfr
ner nobzvangvba hagb gur YBEQ gul Tbq.

23:19 Gubh funyg abg yraq hcba hfhel gb gul oebgure; hfhel bs zbarl,
hfhel bs ivpghnyf, hfhel bs nal guvat gung vf yrag hcba hfhel: 23:20
Hagb n fgenatre gubh znlrfg yraq hcba hfhel; ohg hagb gul oebgure gubh
funyg abg yraq hcba hfhel: gung gur YBEQ gul Tbq znl oyrff gurr va nyy
gung gubh frggrfg guvar unaq gb va gur ynaq juvgure gubh tbrfg gb
cbffrff vg.

23:21 Jura gubh funyg ibj n ibj hagb gur YBEQ gul Tbq, gubh funyg abg
fynpx gb cnl vg: sbe gur YBEQ gul Tbq jvyy fheryl erdhver vg bs gurr;
naq vg jbhyq or fva va gurr.

23:22 Ohg vs gubh funyg sbeorne gb ibj, vg funyy or ab fva va gurr.

23:23 Gung juvpu vf tbar bhg bs gul yvcf gubh funyg xrrc naq cresbez;
rira n serrjvyy bssrevat, nppbeqvat nf gubh unfg ibjrq hagb gur YBEQ
gul Tbq, juvpu gubh unfg cebzvfrq jvgu gul zbhgu.

23:24 Jura gubh pbzrfg vagb gul arvtuobhe'f ivarlneq, gura gubh znlrfg
rng tencrf gul svyy ng guvar bja cyrnfher; ohg gubh funyg abg chg nal
va gul irffry.

23:25 Jura gubh pbzrfg vagb gur fgnaqvat pbea bs gul arvtuobhe, gura
gubh znlrfg cyhpx gur rnef jvgu guvar unaq; ohg gubh funyg abg zbir n
fvpxyr hagb gul arvtuobhe'f fgnaqvat pbea.

24:1 Jura n zna ungu gnxra n jvsr, naq zneevrq ure, naq vg pbzr gb
cnff gung fur svaq ab snibhe va uvf rlrf, orpnhfr ur ungu sbhaq fbzr
hapyrnaarff va ure: gura yrg uvz jevgr ure n ovyy bs qvibeprzrag, naq
tvir vg va ure unaq, naq fraq ure bhg bs uvf ubhfr.

24:2 Naq jura fur vf qrcnegrq bhg bs uvf ubhfr, fur znl tb naq or
nabgure zna'f jvsr.

24:3 Naq vs gur ynggre uhfonaq ungr ure, naq jevgr ure n ovyy bs
qvibeprzrag, naq tvirgu vg va ure unaq, naq fraqrgu ure bhg bs uvf
ubhfr; be vs gur ynggre uhfonaq qvr, juvpu gbbx ure gb or uvf jvsr;
24:4 Ure sbezre uhfonaq, juvpu frag ure njnl, znl abg gnxr ure ntnva
gb or uvf jvsr, nsgre gung fur vf qrsvyrq; sbe gung vf nobzvangvba
orsber gur YBEQ: naq gubh funyg abg pnhfr gur ynaq gb fva, juvpu gur
YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu gurr sbe na vaurevgnapr.

24:5 Jura n zna ungu gnxra n arj jvsr, ur funyy abg tb bhg gb jne,
arvgure funyy ur or punetrq jvgu nal ohfvarff: ohg ur funyy or serr ng
ubzr bar lrne, naq funyy purre hc uvf jvsr juvpu ur ungu gnxra.

24:6 Ab zna funyy gnxr gur argure be gur hccre zvyyfgbar gb cyrqtr:
sbe ur gnxrgu n zna'f yvsr gb cyrqtr.

24:7 Vs n zna or sbhaq fgrnyvat nal bs uvf oerguera bs gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, naq znxrgu zrepunaqvfr bs uvz, be fryyrgu uvz; gura gung guvrs
funyy qvr; naq gubh funyg chg rivy njnl sebz nzbat lbh.

24:8 Gnxr urrq va gur cynthr bs yrcebfl, gung gubh bofreir qvyvtragyl,
naq qb nppbeqvat gb nyy gung gur cevrfgf gur Yrivgrf funyy grnpu lbh:
nf V pbzznaqrq gurz, fb lr funyy bofreir gb qb.

24:9 Erzrzore jung gur YBEQ gul Tbq qvq hagb Zvevnz ol gur jnl, nsgre
gung lr jrer pbzr sbegu bhg bs Rtlcg.

24:10 Jura gubh qbfg yraq gul oebgure nal guvat, gubh funyg abg tb
vagb uvf ubhfr gb srgpu uvf cyrqtr.

24:11 Gubh funyg fgnaq noebnq, naq gur zna gb jubz gubh qbfg yraq
funyy oevat bhg gur cyrqtr noebnq hagb gurr.

24:12 Naq vs gur zna or cbbe, gubh funyg abg fyrrc jvgu uvf cyrqtr:
24:13 Va nal pnfr gubh funyg qryvire uvz gur cyrqtr ntnva jura gur fha
tbrgu qbja, gung ur znl fyrrc va uvf bja envzrag, naq oyrff gurr: naq
vg funyy or evtugrbhfarff hagb gurr orsber gur YBEQ gul Tbq.

24:14 Gubh funyg abg bccerff na uverq freinag gung vf cbbe naq arrql,
jurgure ur or bs gul oerguera, be bs gul fgenatref gung ner va gul
ynaq jvguva gul tngrf: 24:15 Ng uvf qnl gubh funyg tvir uvz uvf uver,
arvgure funyy gur fha tb qbja hcba vg; sbe ur vf cbbe, naq frggrgu uvf
urneg hcba vg: yrfg ur pel ntnvafg gurr hagb gur YBEQ, naq vg or fva
hagb gurr.

24:16 Gur snguref funyy abg or chg gb qrngu sbe gur puvyqera, arvgure
funyy gur puvyqera or chg gb qrngu sbe gur snguref: rirel zna funyy or
chg gb qrngu sbe uvf bja fva.

24:17 Gubh funyg abg creireg gur whqtzrag bs gur fgenatre, abe bs gur
sngureyrff; abe gnxr n jvqbj'f envzrag gb cyrqtr: 24:18 Ohg gubh funyg
erzrzore gung gubh jnfg n obaqzna va Rtlcg, naq gur YBEQ gul Tbq
erqrrzrq gurr gurapr: gurersber V pbzznaq gurr gb qb guvf guvat.

24:19 Jura gubh phggrfg qbja guvar uneirfg va gul svryq, naq unfg
sbetbg n furns va gur svryq, gubh funyg abg tb ntnva gb srgpu vg: vg
funyy or sbe gur fgenatre, sbe gur sngureyrff, naq sbe gur jvqbj: gung
gur YBEQ gul Tbq znl oyrff gurr va nyy gur jbex bs guvar unaqf.

24:20 Jura gubh orngrfg guvar byvir gerr, gubh funyg abg tb bire gur
obhtuf ntnva: vg funyy or sbe gur fgenatre, sbe gur sngureyrff, naq
sbe gur jvqbj.

24:21 Jura gubh tngurerfg gur tencrf bs gul ivarlneq, gubh funyg abg
tyrna vg nsgrejneq: vg funyy or sbe gur fgenatre, sbe gur sngureyrff,
naq sbe gur jvqbj.

24:22 Naq gubh funyg erzrzore gung gubh jnfg n obaqzna va gur ynaq bs
Rtlcg: gurersber V pbzznaq gurr gb qb guvf guvat.

25:1 Vs gurer or n pbagebirefl orgjrra zra, naq gurl pbzr hagb
whqtzrag, gung gur whqtrf znl whqtr gurz; gura gurl funyy whfgvsl gur
evtugrbhf, naq pbaqrza gur jvpxrq.

25:2 Naq vg funyy or, vs gur jvpxrq zna or jbegul gb or orngra, gung
gur whqtr funyy pnhfr uvz gb yvr qbja, naq gb or orngra orsber uvf
snpr, nppbeqvat gb uvf snhyg, ol n pregnva ahzore.

25:3 Sbegl fgevcrf ur znl tvir uvz, naq abg rkprrq: yrfg, vs ur fubhyq
rkprrq, naq orng uvz nobir gurfr jvgu znal fgevcrf, gura gul oebgure
fubhyq frrz ivyr hagb gurr.

25:4 Gubh funyg abg zhmmyr gur bk jura ur gernqrgu bhg gur pbea.

25:5 Vs oerguera qjryy gbtrgure, naq bar bs gurz qvr, naq unir ab
puvyq, gur jvsr bs gur qrnq funyy abg zneel jvgubhg hagb n fgenatre:
ure uhfonaq'f oebgure funyy tb va hagb ure, naq gnxr ure gb uvz gb
jvsr, naq cresbez gur qhgl bs na uhfonaq'f oebgure hagb ure.

25:6 Naq vg funyy or, gung gur svefgobea juvpu fur ornergu funyy
fhpprrq va gur anzr bs uvf oebgure juvpu vf qrnq, gung uvf anzr or abg
chg bhg bs Vfenry.

25:7 Naq vs gur zna yvxr abg gb gnxr uvf oebgure'f jvsr, gura yrg uvf
oebgure'f jvsr tb hc gb gur tngr hagb gur ryqref, naq fnl, Zl
uhfonaq'f oebgure ershfrgu gb envfr hc hagb uvf oebgure n anzr va
Vfenry, ur jvyy abg cresbez gur qhgl bs zl uhfonaq'f oebgure.

25:8 Gura gur ryqref bs uvf pvgl funyy pnyy uvz, naq fcrnx hagb uvz:
naq vs ur fgnaq gb vg, naq fnl, V yvxr abg gb gnxr ure; 25:9 Gura
funyy uvf oebgure'f jvsr pbzr hagb uvz va gur cerfrapr bs gur ryqref,
naq ybbfr uvf fubr sebz bss uvf sbbg, naq fcvg va uvf snpr, naq funyy
nafjre naq fnl, Fb funyy vg or qbar hagb gung zna gung jvyy abg ohvyq
hc uvf oebgure'f ubhfr.

25:10 Naq uvf anzr funyy or pnyyrq va Vfenry, Gur ubhfr bs uvz gung
ungu uvf fubr ybbfrq.

25:11 Jura zra fgevir gbtrgure bar jvgu nabgure, naq gur jvsr bs gur
bar qenjrgu arne sbe gb qryvire ure uhfonaq bhg bs gur unaq bs uvz
gung fzvgrgu uvz, naq chggrgu sbegu ure unaq, naq gnxrgu uvz ol gur
frpergf: 25:12 Gura gubh funyg phg bss ure unaq, guvar rlr funyy abg
cvgl ure.

25:13 Gubh funyg abg unir va gul ont qviref jrvtugf, n terng naq n
fznyy.

25:14 Gubh funyg abg unir va guvar ubhfr qviref zrnfherf, n terng naq
n fznyy.

25:15 Ohg gubh funyg unir n cresrpg naq whfg jrvtug, n cresrpg naq
whfg zrnfher funyg gubh unir: gung gul qnlf znl or yratgurarq va gur
ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu gurr.

25:16 Sbe nyy gung qb fhpu guvatf, naq nyy gung qb haevtugrbhfyl, ner
na nobzvangvba hagb gur YBEQ gul Tbq.

25:17 Erzrzore jung Nznyrx qvq hagb gurr ol gur jnl, jura lr jrer pbzr
sbegu bhg bs Rtlcg; 25:18 Ubj ur zrg gurr ol gur jnl, naq fzbgr gur
uvaqzbfg bs gurr, rira nyy gung jrer srroyr oruvaq gurr, jura gubh
jnfg snvag naq jrnel; naq ur srnerq abg Tbq.

25:19 Gurersber vg funyy or, jura gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu tvira gurr
erfg sebz nyy guvar rarzvrf ebhaq nobhg, va gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ
gul Tbq tvirgu gurr sbe na vaurevgnapr gb cbffrff vg, gung gubh funyg
oybg bhg gur erzrzoenapr bs Nznyrx sebz haqre urnira; gubh funyg abg
sbetrg vg.

26:1 Naq vg funyy or, jura gubh neg pbzr va hagb gur ynaq juvpu gur
YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu gurr sbe na vaurevgnapr, naq cbffrffrfg vg, naq
qjryyrfg gurerva; 26:2 Gung gubh funyg gnxr bs gur svefg bs nyy gur
sehvg bs gur rnegu, juvpu gubh funyg oevat bs gul ynaq gung gur YBEQ
gul Tbq tvirgu gurr, naq funyg chg vg va n onfxrg, naq funyg tb hagb
gur cynpr juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq funyy pubbfr gb cynpr uvf anzr gurer.

26:3 Naq gubh funyg tb hagb gur cevrfg gung funyy or va gubfr qnlf,
naq fnl hagb uvz, V cebsrff guvf qnl hagb gur YBEQ gul Tbq, gung V nz
pbzr hagb gur pbhagel juvpu gur YBEQ fjner hagb bhe snguref sbe gb
tvir hf.

26:4 Naq gur cevrfg funyy gnxr gur onfxrg bhg bs guvar unaq, naq frg
vg qbja orsber gur nygne bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq.

26:5 Naq gubh funyg fcrnx naq fnl orsber gur YBEQ gul Tbq, N Flevna
ernql gb crevfu jnf zl sngure, naq ur jrag qbja vagb Rtlcg, naq
fbwbhearq gurer jvgu n srj, naq orpnzr gurer n angvba, terng, zvtugl,
naq cbchybhf: 26:6 Naq gur Rtlcgvnaf rivy ragerngrq hf, naq nssyvpgrq
hf, naq ynvq hcba hf uneq obaqntr: 26:7 Naq jura jr pevrq hagb gur
YBEQ Tbq bs bhe snguref, gur YBEQ urneq bhe ibvpr, naq ybbxrq ba bhe
nssyvpgvba, naq bhe ynobhe, naq bhe bccerffvba: 26:8 Naq gur YBEQ
oebhtug hf sbegu bhg bs Rtlcg jvgu n zvtugl unaq, naq jvgu na
bhgfgergpurq nez, naq jvgu terng greevoyrarff, naq jvgu fvtaf, naq
jvgu jbaqref: 26:9 Naq ur ungu oebhtug hf vagb guvf cynpr, naq ungu
tvira hf guvf ynaq, rira n ynaq gung sybjrgu jvgu zvyx naq ubarl.

26:10 Naq abj, orubyq, V unir oebhtug gur svefgsehvgf bs gur ynaq,
juvpu gubh, B YBEQ, unfg tvira zr. Naq gubh funyg frg vg orsber gur
YBEQ gul Tbq, naq jbefuvc orsber gur YBEQ gul Tbq: 26:11 Naq gubh
funyg erwbvpr va rirel tbbq guvat juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu tvira
hagb gurr, naq hagb guvar ubhfr, gubh, naq gur Yrivgr, naq gur
fgenatre gung vf nzbat lbh.

26:12 Jura gubh unfg znqr na raq bs gvguvat nyy gur gvgurf bs guvar
vapernfr gur guveq lrne, juvpu vf gur lrne bs gvguvat, naq unfg tvira
vg hagb gur Yrivgr, gur fgenatre, gur sngureyrff, naq gur jvqbj, gung
gurl znl rng jvguva gul tngrf, naq or svyyrq; 26:13 Gura gubh funyg
fnl orsber gur YBEQ gul Tbq, V unir oebhtug njnl gur unyybjrq guvatf
bhg bs zvar ubhfr, naq nyfb unir tvira gurz hagb gur Yrivgr, naq hagb
gur fgenatre, gb gur sngureyrff, naq gb gur jvqbj, nppbeqvat gb nyy
gul pbzznaqzragf juvpu gubh unfg pbzznaqrq zr: V unir abg genafterffrq
gul pbzznaqzragf, arvgure unir V sbetbggra gurz.

26:14 V unir abg rngra gurerbs va zl zbheavat, arvgure unir V gnxra
njnl bhtug gurerbs sbe nal hapyrna hfr, abe tvira bhtug gurerbs sbe
gur qrnq: ohg V unir urnexrarq gb gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ zl Tbq, naq
unir qbar nppbeqvat gb nyy gung gubh unfg pbzznaqrq zr.

26:15 Ybbx qbja sebz gul ubyl unovgngvba, sebz urnira, naq oyrff gul
crbcyr Vfenry, naq gur ynaq juvpu gubh unfg tvira hf, nf gubh fjnerfg
hagb bhe snguref, n ynaq gung sybjrgu jvgu zvyx naq ubarl.

26:16 Guvf qnl gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu pbzznaqrq gurr gb qb gurfr
fgnghgrf naq whqtzragf: gubh funyg gurersber xrrc naq qb gurz jvgu nyy
guvar urneg, naq jvgu nyy gul fbhy.

26:17 Gubh unfg nibhpurq gur YBEQ guvf qnl gb or gul Tbq, naq gb jnyx
va uvf jnlf, naq gb xrrc uvf fgnghgrf, naq uvf pbzznaqzragf, naq uvf
whqtzragf, naq gb urnexra hagb uvf ibvpr: 26:18 Naq gur YBEQ ungu
nibhpurq gurr guvf qnl gb or uvf crphyvne crbcyr, nf ur ungu cebzvfrq
gurr, naq gung gubh fubhyqrfg xrrc nyy uvf pbzznaqzragf; 26:19 Naq gb
znxr gurr uvtu nobir nyy angvbaf juvpu ur ungu znqr, va cenvfr, naq va
anzr, naq va ubabhe; naq gung gubh znlrfg or na ubyl crbcyr hagb gur
YBEQ gul Tbq, nf ur ungu fcbxra.

27:1 Naq Zbfrf jvgu gur ryqref bs Vfenry pbzznaqrq gur crbcyr, fnlvat,
Xrrc nyy gur pbzznaqzragf juvpu V pbzznaq lbh guvf qnl.

27:2 Naq vg funyy or ba gur qnl jura lr funyy cnff bire Wbeqna hagb
gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu gurr, gung gubh funyg frg gurr
hc terng fgbarf, naq cynvfgre gurz jvgu cynvfgre: 27:3 Naq gubh funyg
jevgr hcba gurz nyy gur jbeqf bs guvf ynj, jura gubh neg cnffrq bire,
gung gubh znlrfg tb va hagb gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu
gurr, n ynaq gung sybjrgu jvgu zvyx naq ubarl; nf gur YBEQ Tbq bs gul
snguref ungu cebzvfrq gurr.

27:4 Gurersber vg funyy or jura lr or tbar bire Wbeqna, gung lr funyy
frg hc gurfr fgbarf, juvpu V pbzznaq lbh guvf qnl, va zbhag Rony, naq
gubh funyg cynvfgre gurz jvgu cynvfgre.

27:5 Naq gurer funyg gubh ohvyq na nygne hagb gur YBEQ gul Tbq, na
nygne bs fgbarf: gubh funyg abg yvsg hc nal veba gbby hcba gurz.

27:6 Gubh funyg ohvyq gur nygne bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq bs jubyr fgbarf:
naq gubh funyg bssre oheag bssrevatf gurerba hagb gur YBEQ gul Tbq:
27:7 Naq gubh funyg bssre crnpr bssrevatf, naq funyg rng gurer, naq
erwbvpr orsber gur YBEQ gul Tbq.

27:8 Naq gubh funyg jevgr hcba gur fgbarf nyy gur jbeqf bs guvf ynj
irel cynvayl.

27:9 Naq Zbfrf naq gur cevrfgf gur Yrivgrf fcnxr hagb nyy Vfenry,
fnlvat, Gnxr urrq, naq urnexra, B Vfenry; guvf qnl gubh neg orpbzr gur
crbcyr bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq.

27:10 Gubh funyg gurersber borl gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq, naq qb
uvf pbzznaqzragf naq uvf fgnghgrf, juvpu V pbzznaq gurr guvf qnl.

27:11 Naq Zbfrf punetrq gur crbcyr gur fnzr qnl, fnlvat, 27:12 Gurfr
funyy fgnaq hcba zbhag Trevmvz gb oyrff gur crbcyr, jura lr ner pbzr
bire Wbeqna; Fvzrba, naq Yriv, naq Whqnu, naq Vffnpune, naq Wbfrcu,
naq Orawnzva: 27:13 Naq gurfr funyy fgnaq hcba zbhag Rony gb phefr;
Erhora, Tnq, naq Nfure, naq Mrohyha, Qna, naq Ancugnyv.

27:14 Naq gur Yrivgrf funyy fcrnx, naq fnl hagb nyy gur zra bs Vfenry
jvgu n ybhq ibvpr, 27:15 Phefrq or gur zna gung znxrgu nal tenira be
zbygra vzntr, na nobzvangvba hagb gur YBEQ, gur jbex bs gur unaqf bs
gur pensgfzna, naq chggrgu vg va n frperg cynpr. Naq nyy gur crbcyr
funyy nafjre naq fnl, Nzra.

27:16 Phefrq or ur gung frggrgu yvtug ol uvf sngure be uvf zbgure. Naq
nyy gur crbcyr funyy fnl, Nzra.

27:17 Phefrq or ur gung erzbirgu uvf arvtuobhe'f ynaqznex. Naq nyy gur
crbcyr funyy fnl, Nzra.

27:18 Phefrq or ur gung znxrgu gur oyvaq gb jnaqre bhg bs gur jnl. Naq
nyy gur crbcyr funyy fnl, Nzra.

27:19 Phefrq or ur gung creiregrgu gur whqtzrag bs gur fgenatre,
sngureyrff, naq jvqbj. Naq nyy gur crbcyr funyy fnl, Nzra.

27:20 Phefrq or ur gung yvrgu jvgu uvf sngure'f jvsr; orpnhfr ur
hapbirergu uvf sngure'f fxveg. Naq nyy gur crbcyr funyy fnl, Nzra.

27:21 Phefrq or ur gung yvrgu jvgu nal znaare bs ornfg. Naq nyy gur
crbcyr funyy fnl, Nzra.

27:22 Phefrq or ur gung yvrgu jvgu uvf fvfgre, gur qnhtugre bs uvf
sngure, be gur qnhtugre bs uvf zbgure. Naq nyy gur crbcyr funyy fnl,
Nzra.

27:23 Phefrq or ur gung yvrgu jvgu uvf zbgure va ynj. Naq nyy gur
crbcyr funyy fnl, Nzra.

27:24 Phefrq or ur gung fzvgrgu uvf arvtuobhe frpergyl. Naq nyy gur
crbcyr funyy fnl, Nzra.

27:25 Phefrq or ur gung gnxrgu erjneq gb fynl na vaabprag crefba. Naq
nyy gur crbcyr funyy fnl, Nzra.

27:26 Phefrq or ur gung pbasvezrgu abg nyy gur jbeqf bs guvf ynj gb qb
gurz. Naq nyy gur crbcyr funyy fnl, Nzra.

28:1 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, vs gubh funyg urnexra qvyvtragyl hagb
gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq, gb bofreir naq gb qb nyy uvf
pbzznaqzragf juvpu V pbzznaq gurr guvf qnl, gung gur YBEQ gul Tbq jvyy
frg gurr ba uvtu nobir nyy angvbaf bs gur rnegu: 28:2 Naq nyy gurfr
oyrffvatf funyy pbzr ba gurr, naq biregnxr gurr, vs gubh funyg urnexra
hagb gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq.

28:3 Oyrffrq funyg gubh or va gur pvgl, naq oyrffrq funyg gubh or va
gur svryq.

28:4 Oyrffrq funyy or gur sehvg bs gul obql, naq gur sehvg bs gul
tebhaq, naq gur sehvg bs gul pnggyr, gur vapernfr bs gul xvar, naq gur
sybpxf bs gul furrc.

28:5 Oyrffrq funyy or gul onfxrg naq gul fgber.

28:6 Oyrffrq funyg gubh or jura gubh pbzrfg va, naq oyrffrq funyg gubh
or jura gubh tbrfg bhg.

28:7 Gur YBEQ funyy pnhfr guvar rarzvrf gung evfr hc ntnvafg gurr gb
or fzvggra orsber gul snpr: gurl funyy pbzr bhg ntnvafg gurr bar jnl,
naq syrr orsber gurr frira jnlf.

28:8 Gur YBEQ funyy pbzznaq gur oyrffvat hcba gurr va gul fgberubhfrf,
naq va nyy gung gubh frggrfg guvar unaq hagb; naq ur funyy oyrff gurr
va gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq tvirgu gurr.

28:9 Gur YBEQ funyy rfgnoyvfu gurr na ubyl crbcyr hagb uvzfrys, nf ur
ungu fjbea hagb gurr, vs gubh funyg xrrc gur pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ
gul Tbq, naq jnyx va uvf jnlf.

28:10 Naq nyy crbcyr bs gur rnegu funyy frr gung gubh neg pnyyrq ol
gur anzr bs gur YBEQ; naq gurl funyy or nsenvq bs gurr.

28:11 Naq gur YBEQ funyy znxr gurr cyragrbhf va tbbqf, va gur sehvg bs
gul obql, naq va gur sehvg bs gul pnggyr, naq va gur sehvg bs gul
tebhaq, va gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ fjner hagb gul snguref gb tvir
gurr.

28:12 Gur YBEQ funyy bcra hagb gurr uvf tbbq gernfher, gur urnira gb
tvir gur enva hagb gul ynaq va uvf frnfba, naq gb oyrff nyy gur jbex
bs guvar unaq: naq gubh funyg yraq hagb znal angvbaf, naq gubh funyg
abg obeebj.

28:13 Naq gur YBEQ funyy znxr gurr gur urnq, naq abg gur gnvy; naq
gubh funyg or nobir bayl, naq gubh funyg abg or orarngu; vs gung gubh
urnexra hagb gur pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq, juvpu V pbzznaq
gurr guvf qnl, gb bofreir naq gb qb gurz: 28:14 Naq gubh funyg abg tb
nfvqr sebz nal bs gur jbeqf juvpu V pbzznaq gurr guvf qnl, gb gur
evtug unaq, be gb gur yrsg, gb tb nsgre bgure tbqf gb freir gurz.

28:15 Ohg vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, vs gubh jvyg abg urnexra hagb gur
ibvpr bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq, gb bofreir gb qb nyy uvf pbzznaqzragf naq
uvf fgnghgrf juvpu V pbzznaq gurr guvf qnl; gung nyy gurfr phefrf
funyy pbzr hcba gurr, naq biregnxr gurr: 28:16 Phefrq funyg gubh or va
gur pvgl, naq phefrq funyg gubh or va gur svryq.

28:17 Phefrq funyy or gul onfxrg naq gul fgber.

28:18 Phefrq funyy or gur sehvg bs gul obql, naq gur sehvg bs gul
ynaq, gur vapernfr bs gul xvar, naq gur sybpxf bs gul furrc.

28:19 Phefrq funyg gubh or jura gubh pbzrfg va, naq phefrq funyg gubh
or jura gubh tbrfg bhg.

28:20 Gur YBEQ funyy fraq hcba gurr phefvat, irkngvba, naq erohxr, va
nyy gung gubh frggrfg guvar unaq hagb sbe gb qb, hagvy gubh or
qrfgeblrq, naq hagvy gubh crevfu dhvpxyl; orpnhfr bs gur jvpxrqarff bs
gul qbvatf, jurerol gubh unfg sbefnxra zr.

28:21 Gur YBEQ funyy znxr gur crfgvyrapr pyrnir hagb gurr, hagvy ur
unir pbafhzrq gurr sebz bss gur ynaq, juvgure gubh tbrfg gb cbffrff
vg.

28:22 Gur YBEQ funyy fzvgr gurr jvgu n pbafhzcgvba, naq jvgu n srire,
naq jvgu na vasynzzngvba, naq jvgu na rkgerzr oheavat, naq jvgu gur
fjbeq, naq jvgu oynfgvat, naq jvgu zvyqrj; naq gurl funyy chefhr gurr
hagvy gubh crevfu.

28:23 Naq gul urnira gung vf bire gul urnq funyy or oenff, naq gur
rnegu gung vf haqre gurr funyy or veba.

28:24 Gur YBEQ funyy znxr gur enva bs gul ynaq cbjqre naq qhfg: sebz
urnira funyy vg pbzr qbja hcba gurr, hagvy gubh or qrfgeblrq.

28:25 Gur YBEQ funyy pnhfr gurr gb or fzvggra orsber guvar rarzvrf:
gubh funyg tb bhg bar jnl ntnvafg gurz, naq syrr frira jnlf orsber
gurz: naq funyg or erzbirq vagb nyy gur xvatqbzf bs gur rnegu.

28:26 Naq gul pnepnfr funyy or zrng hagb nyy sbjyf bs gur nve, naq
hagb gur ornfgf bs gur rnegu, naq ab zna funyy senl gurz njnl.

28:27 Gur YBEQ jvyy fzvgr gurr jvgu gur obgpu bs Rtlcg, naq jvgu gur
rzrebqf, naq jvgu gur fpno, naq jvgu gur vgpu, jurerbs gubh pnafg abg
or urnyrq.

28:28 Gur YBEQ funyy fzvgr gurr jvgu znqarff, naq oyvaqarff, naq
nfgbavfuzrag bs urneg: 28:29 Naq gubh funyg tebcr ng abbaqnl, nf gur
oyvaq tebcrgu va qnexarff, naq gubh funyg abg cebfcre va gul jnlf: naq
gubh funyg or bayl bccerffrq naq fcbvyrq rirezber, naq ab zna funyy
fnir gurr.

28:30 Gubh funyg orgebgu n jvsr, naq nabgure zna funyy yvr jvgu ure:
gubh funyg ohvyq na ubhfr, naq gubh funyg abg qjryy gurerva: gubh
funyg cynag n ivarlneq, naq funyg abg tngure gur tencrf gurerbs.

28:31 Guvar bk funyy or fynva orsber guvar rlrf, naq gubh funyg abg
rng gurerbs: guvar nff funyy or ivbyragyl gnxra njnl sebz orsber gul
snpr, naq funyy abg or erfgberq gb gurr: gul furrc funyy or tvira hagb
guvar rarzvrf, naq gubh funyg unir abar gb erfphr gurz.

28:32 Gul fbaf naq gul qnhtugref funyy or tvira hagb nabgure crbcyr,
naq guvar rlrf funyy ybbx, naq snvy jvgu ybatvat sbe gurz nyy gur qnl
ybat; naq gurer funyy or ab zvtug va guvar unaq.

28:33 Gur sehvg bs gul ynaq, naq nyy gul ynobhef, funyy n angvba juvpu
gubh xabjrfg abg rng hc; naq gubh funyg or bayl bccerffrq naq pehfurq
nyjnl: 28:34 Fb gung gubh funyg or znq sbe gur fvtug bs guvar rlrf
juvpu gubh funyg frr.

28:35 Gur YBEQ funyy fzvgr gurr va gur xarrf, naq va gur yrtf, jvgu n
fber obgpu gung pnaabg or urnyrq, sebz gur fbyr bs gul sbbg hagb gur
gbc bs gul urnq.

28:36 Gur YBEQ funyy oevat gurr, naq gul xvat juvpu gubh funyg frg
bire gurr, hagb n angvba juvpu arvgure gubh abe gul snguref unir
xabja; naq gurer funyg gubh freir bgure tbqf, jbbq naq fgbar.

28:37 Naq gubh funyg orpbzr na nfgbavfuzrag, n cebireo, naq n oljbeq,
nzbat nyy angvbaf juvgure gur YBEQ funyy yrnq gurr.

28:38 Gubh funyg pneel zhpu frrq bhg vagb gur svryq, naq funyg tngure
ohg yvggyr va; sbe gur ybphfg funyy pbafhzr vg.

28:39 Gubh funyg cynag ivarlneqf, naq qerff gurz, ohg funyg arvgure
qevax bs gur jvar, abe tngure gur tencrf; sbe gur jbezf funyy rng
gurz.

28:40 Gubh funyg unir byvir gerrf guebhtubhg nyy gul pbnfgf, ohg gubh
funyg abg nabvag gulfrys jvgu gur bvy; sbe guvar byvir funyy pnfg uvf
sehvg.

28:41 Gubh funyg ortrg fbaf naq qnhtugref, ohg gubh funyg abg rawbl
gurz; sbe gurl funyy tb vagb pncgvivgl.

28:42 Nyy gul gerrf naq sehvg bs gul ynaq funyy gur ybphfg pbafhzr.

28:43 Gur fgenatre gung vf jvguva gurr funyy trg hc nobir gurr irel
uvtu; naq gubh funyg pbzr qbja irel ybj.

28:44 Ur funyy yraq gb gurr, naq gubh funyg abg yraq gb uvz: ur funyy
or gur urnq, naq gubh funyg or gur gnvy.

28:45 Zberbire nyy gurfr phefrf funyy pbzr hcba gurr, naq funyy chefhr
gurr, naq biregnxr gurr, gvyy gubh or qrfgeblrq; orpnhfr gubh
urnexrarqfg abg hagb gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq, gb xrrc uvf
pbzznaqzragf naq uvf fgnghgrf juvpu ur pbzznaqrq gurr: 28:46 Naq gurl
funyy or hcba gurr sbe n fvta naq sbe n jbaqre, naq hcba gul frrq sbe
rire.

28:47 Orpnhfr gubh freirqfg abg gur YBEQ gul Tbq jvgu wblshyarff, naq
jvgu tynqarff bs urneg, sbe gur nohaqnapr bs nyy guvatf; 28:48
Gurersber funyg gubh freir guvar rarzvrf juvpu gur YBEQ funyy fraq
ntnvafg gurr, va uhatre, naq va guvefg, naq va anxrqarff, naq va jnag
bs nyy guvatf: naq ur funyy chg n lbxr bs veba hcba gul arpx, hagvy ur
unir qrfgeblrq gurr.

28:49 Gur YBEQ funyy oevat n angvba ntnvafg gurr sebz sne, sebz gur
raq bs gur rnegu, nf fjvsg nf gur rntyr syvrgu; n angvba jubfr gbathr
gubh funyg abg haqrefgnaq; 28:50 N angvba bs svrepr pbhagranapr, juvpu
funyy abg ertneq gur crefba bs gur byq, abe furj snibhe gb gur lbhat:
28:51 Naq ur funyy rng gur sehvg bs gul pnggyr, naq gur sehvg bs gul
ynaq, hagvy gubh or qrfgeblrq: juvpu nyfb funyy abg yrnir gurr rvgure
pbea, jvar, be bvy, be gur vapernfr bs gul xvar, be sybpxf bs gul
furrc, hagvy ur unir qrfgeblrq gurr.

28:52 Naq ur funyy orfvrtr gurr va nyy gul tngrf, hagvy gul uvtu naq
sraprq jnyyf pbzr qbja, jurerva gubh gehfgrqfg, guebhtubhg nyy gul
ynaq: naq ur funyy orfvrtr gurr va nyy gul tngrf guebhtubhg nyy gul
ynaq, juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu tvira gurr.

28:53 Naq gubh funyg rng gur sehvg bs guvar bja obql, gur syrfu bs gul
fbaf naq bs gul qnhtugref, juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu tvira gurr, va
gur fvrtr, naq va gur fgenvgarff, jurerjvgu guvar rarzvrf funyy
qvfgerff gurr: 28:54 Fb gung gur zna gung vf graqre nzbat lbh, naq
irel qryvpngr, uvf rlr funyy or rivy gbjneq uvf oebgure, naq gbjneq
gur jvsr bs uvf obfbz, naq gbjneq gur erzanag bs uvf puvyqera juvpu ur
funyy yrnir: 28:55 Fb gung ur jvyy abg tvir gb nal bs gurz bs gur
syrfu bs uvf puvyqera jubz ur funyy rng: orpnhfr ur ungu abguvat yrsg
uvz va gur fvrtr, naq va gur fgenvgarff, jurerjvgu guvar rarzvrf funyy
qvfgerff gurr va nyy gul tngrf.

28:56 Gur graqre naq qryvpngr jbzna nzbat lbh, juvpu jbhyq abg
nqiragher gb frg gur fbyr bs ure sbbg hcba gur tebhaq sbe qryvpngrarff
naq graqrearff, ure rlr funyy or rivy gbjneq gur uhfonaq bs ure obfbz,
naq gbjneq ure fba, naq gbjneq ure qnhtugre, 28:57 Naq gbjneq ure
lbhat bar gung pbzrgu bhg sebz orgjrra ure srrg, naq gbjneq ure
puvyqera juvpu fur funyy orne: sbe fur funyy rng gurz sbe jnag bs nyy
guvatf frpergyl va gur fvrtr naq fgenvgarff, jurerjvgu guvar rarzl
funyy qvfgerff gurr va gul tngrf.

28:58 Vs gubh jvyg abg bofreir gb qb nyy gur jbeqf bs guvf ynj gung
ner jevggra va guvf obbx, gung gubh znlrfg srne guvf tybevbhf naq
srneshy anzr, GUR YBEQ GUL TBQ; 28:59 Gura gur YBEQ jvyy znxr gul
cynthrf jbaqreshy, naq gur cynthrf bs gul frrq, rira terng cynthrf,
naq bs ybat pbagvahnapr, naq fber fvpxarffrf, naq bs ybat pbagvahnapr.

28:60 Zberbire ur jvyy oevat hcba gurr nyy gur qvfrnfrf bs Rtlcg,
juvpu gubh jnfg nsenvq bs; naq gurl funyy pyrnir hagb gurr.

28:61 Nyfb rirel fvpxarff, naq rirel cynthr, juvpu vf abg jevggra va
gur obbx bs guvf ynj, gurz jvyy gur YBEQ oevat hcba gurr, hagvy gubh
or qrfgeblrq.

28:62 Naq lr funyy or yrsg srj va ahzore, jurernf lr jrer nf gur fgnef
bs urnira sbe zhygvghqr; orpnhfr gubh jbhyqrfg abg borl gur ibvpr bs
gur YBEQ gul Tbq.

28:63 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, gung nf gur YBEQ erwbvprq bire lbh gb
qb lbh tbbq, naq gb zhygvcyl lbh; fb gur YBEQ jvyy erwbvpr bire lbh gb
qrfgebl lbh, naq gb oevat lbh gb abhtug; naq lr funyy or cyhpxrq sebz
bss gur ynaq juvgure gubh tbrfg gb cbffrff vg.

28:64 Naq gur YBEQ funyy fpnggre gurr nzbat nyy crbcyr, sebz gur bar
raq bs gur rnegu rira hagb gur bgure; naq gurer gubh funyg freir bgure
tbqf, juvpu arvgure gubh abe gul snguref unir xabja, rira jbbq naq
fgbar.

28:65 Naq nzbat gurfr angvbaf funyg gubh svaq ab rnfr, arvgure funyy
gur fbyr bs gul sbbg unir erfg: ohg gur YBEQ funyy tvir gurr gurer n
gerzoyvat urneg, naq snvyvat bs rlrf, naq fbeebj bs zvaq: 28:66 Naq
gul yvsr funyy unat va qbhog orsber gurr; naq gubh funyg srne qnl naq
avtug, naq funyg unir abar nffhenapr bs gul yvsr: 28:67 Va gur zbeavat
gubh funyg fnl, Jbhyq Tbq vg jrer rira! naq ng rira gubh funyg fnl,
Jbhyq Tbq vg jrer zbeavat! sbe gur srne bs guvar urneg jurerjvgu gubh
funyg srne, naq sbe gur fvtug bs guvar rlrf juvpu gubh funyg frr.

28:68 Naq gur YBEQ funyy oevat gurr vagb Rtlcg ntnva jvgu fuvcf, ol
gur jnl jurerbs V fcnxr hagb gurr, Gubh funyg frr vg ab zber ntnva:
naq gurer lr funyy or fbyq hagb lbhe rarzvrf sbe obaqzra naq
obaqjbzra, naq ab zna funyy ohl lbh.

29:1 Gurfr ner gur jbeqf bs gur pbiranag, juvpu gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq
Zbfrf gb znxr jvgu gur puvyqera bs Vfenry va gur ynaq bs Zbno, orfvqr
gur pbiranag juvpu ur znqr jvgu gurz va Ubero.

29:2 Naq Zbfrf pnyyrq hagb nyy Vfenry, naq fnvq hagb gurz, Lr unir
frra nyy gung gur YBEQ qvq orsber lbhe rlrf va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg hagb
Cunenbu, naq hagb nyy uvf freinagf, naq hagb nyy uvf ynaq; 29:3 Gur
terng grzcgngvbaf juvpu guvar rlrf unir frra, gur fvtaf, naq gubfr
terng zvenpyrf: 29:4 Lrg gur YBEQ ungu abg tvira lbh na urneg gb
creprvir, naq rlrf gb frr, naq rnef gb urne, hagb guvf qnl.

29:5 Naq V unir yrq lbh sbegl lrnef va gur jvyqrearff: lbhe pybgurf
ner abg jnkra byq hcba lbh, naq gul fubr vf abg jnkra byq hcba gul
sbbg.

29:6 Lr unir abg rngra oernq, arvgure unir lr qehax jvar be fgebat
qevax: gung lr zvtug xabj gung V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

29:7 Naq jura lr pnzr hagb guvf cynpr, Fvuba gur xvat bs Urfuoba, naq
Bt gur xvat bs Onfuna, pnzr bhg ntnvafg hf hagb onggyr, naq jr fzbgr
gurz: 29:8 Naq jr gbbx gurve ynaq, naq tnir vg sbe na vaurevgnapr hagb
gur Erhoravgrf, naq gb gur Tnqvgrf, naq gb gur unys gevor bs Znanffru.

29:9 Xrrc gurersber gur jbeqf bs guvf pbiranag, naq qb gurz, gung lr
znl cebfcre va nyy gung lr qb.

29:10 Lr fgnaq guvf qnl nyy bs lbh orsber gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq; lbhe
pncgnvaf bs lbhe gevorf, lbhe ryqref, naq lbhe bssvpref, jvgu nyy gur
zra bs Vfenry, 29:11 Lbhe yvggyr barf, lbhe jvirf, naq gul fgenatre
gung vf va gul pnzc, sebz gur urjre bs gul jbbq hagb gur qenjre bs gul
jngre: 29:12 Gung gubh fubhyqrfg ragre vagb pbiranag jvgu gur YBEQ gul
Tbq, naq vagb uvf bngu, juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq znxrgu jvgu gurr guvf
qnl: 29:13 Gung ur znl rfgnoyvfu gurr gb qnl sbe n crbcyr hagb
uvzfrys, naq gung ur znl or hagb gurr n Tbq, nf ur ungu fnvq hagb
gurr, naq nf ur ungu fjbea hagb gul snguref, gb Noenunz, gb Vfnnp, naq
gb Wnpbo.

29:14 Arvgure jvgu lbh bayl qb V znxr guvf pbiranag naq guvf bngu;
29:15 Ohg jvgu uvz gung fgnaqrgu urer jvgu hf guvf qnl orsber gur YBEQ
bhe Tbq, naq nyfb jvgu uvz gung vf abg urer jvgu hf guvf qnl: 29:16
(Sbe lr xabj ubj jr unir qjryg va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg; naq ubj jr pnzr
guebhtu gur angvbaf juvpu lr cnffrq ol; 29:17 Naq lr unir frra gurve
nobzvangvbaf, naq gurve vqbyf, jbbq naq fgbar, fvyire naq tbyq, juvpu
jrer nzbat gurz:) 29:18 Yrfg gurer fubhyq or nzbat lbh zna, be jbzna,
be snzvyl, be gevor, jubfr urneg gheargu njnl guvf qnl sebz gur YBEQ
bhe Tbq, gb tb naq freir gur tbqf bs gurfr angvbaf; yrfg gurer fubhyq
or nzbat lbh n ebbg gung ornergu tnyy naq jbezjbbq; 29:19 Naq vg pbzr
gb cnff, jura ur urnergu gur jbeqf bs guvf phefr, gung ur oyrff
uvzfrys va uvf urneg, fnlvat, V funyy unir crnpr, gubhtu V jnyx va gur
vzntvangvba bs zvar urneg, gb nqq qehaxraarff gb guvefg: 29:20 Gur
YBEQ jvyy abg fcner uvz, ohg gura gur natre bs gur YBEQ naq uvf
wrnybhfl funyy fzbxr ntnvafg gung zna, naq nyy gur phefrf gung ner
jevggra va guvf obbx funyy yvr hcba uvz, naq gur YBEQ funyy oybg bhg
uvf anzr sebz haqre urnira.

29:21 Naq gur YBEQ funyy frcnengr uvz hagb rivy bhg bs nyy gur gevorf
bs Vfenry, nppbeqvat gb nyy gur phefrf bs gur pbiranag gung ner
jevggra va guvf obbx bs gur ynj: 29:22 Fb gung gur trarengvba gb pbzr
bs lbhe puvyqera gung funyy evfr hc nsgre lbh, naq gur fgenatre gung
funyy pbzr sebz n sne ynaq, funyy fnl, jura gurl frr gur cynthrf bs
gung ynaq, naq gur fvpxarffrf juvpu gur YBEQ ungu ynvq hcba vg; 29:23
Naq gung gur jubyr ynaq gurerbs vf oevzfgbar, naq fnyg, naq oheavat,
gung vg vf abg fbja, abe ornergu, abe nal tenff tebjrgu gurerva, yvxr
gur bireguebj bs Fbqbz, naq Tbzbeenu, Nqznu, naq Mrobvz, juvpu gur
YBEQ bireguerj va uvf natre, naq va uvf jengu: 29:24 Rira nyy angvbaf
funyy fnl, Jurersber ungu gur YBEQ qbar guhf hagb guvf ynaq? jung
zrnargu gur urng bs guvf terng natre?  29:25 Gura zra funyy fnl,
Orpnhfr gurl unir sbefnxra gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ Tbq bs gurve
snguref, juvpu ur znqr jvgu gurz jura ur oebhtug gurz sbegu bhg bs gur
ynaq bs Rtlcg: 29:26 Sbe gurl jrag naq freirq bgure tbqf, naq
jbefuvccrq gurz, tbqf jubz gurl xarj abg, naq jubz ur unq abg tvira
hagb gurz: 29:27 Naq gur natre bs gur YBEQ jnf xvaqyrq ntnvafg guvf
ynaq, gb oevat hcba vg nyy gur phefrf gung ner jevggra va guvf obbx:
29:28 Naq gur YBEQ ebbgrq gurz bhg bs gurve ynaq va natre, naq va
jengu, naq va terng vaqvtangvba, naq pnfg gurz vagb nabgure ynaq, nf
vg vf guvf qnl.

29:29 Gur frperg guvatf orybat hagb gur YBEQ bhe Tbq: ohg gubfr guvatf
juvpu ner erirnyrq orybat hagb hf naq gb bhe puvyqera sbe rire, gung
jr znl qb nyy gur jbeqf bs guvf ynj.

30:1 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, jura nyy gurfr guvatf ner pbzr hcba
gurr, gur oyrffvat naq gur phefr, juvpu V unir frg orsber gurr, naq
gubh funyg pnyy gurz gb zvaq nzbat nyy gur angvbaf, juvgure gur YBEQ
gul Tbq ungu qevira gurr, 30:2 Naq funyg erghea hagb gur YBEQ gul Tbq,
naq funyg borl uvf ibvpr nppbeqvat gb nyy gung V pbzznaq gurr guvf
qnl, gubh naq gul puvyqera, jvgu nyy guvar urneg, naq jvgu nyy gul
fbhy; 30:3 Gung gura gur YBEQ gul Tbq jvyy ghea gul pncgvivgl, naq
unir pbzcnffvba hcba gurr, naq jvyy erghea naq tngure gurr sebz nyy
gur angvbaf, juvgure gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu fpnggrerq gurr.

30:4 Vs nal bs guvar or qevira bhg hagb gur bhgzbfg cnegf bs urnira,
sebz gurapr jvyy gur YBEQ gul Tbq tngure gurr, naq sebz gurapr jvyy ur
srgpu gurr: 30:5 Naq gur YBEQ gul Tbq jvyy oevat gurr vagb gur ynaq
juvpu gul snguref cbffrffrq, naq gubh funyg cbffrff vg; naq ur jvyy qb
gurr tbbq, naq zhygvcyl gurr nobir gul snguref.

30:6 Naq gur YBEQ gul Tbq jvyy pvephzpvfr guvar urneg, naq gur urneg
bs gul frrq, gb ybir gur YBEQ gul Tbq jvgu nyy guvar urneg, naq jvgu
nyy gul fbhy, gung gubh znlrfg yvir.

30:7 Naq gur YBEQ gul Tbq jvyy chg nyy gurfr phefrf hcba guvar
rarzvrf, naq ba gurz gung ungr gurr, juvpu crefrphgrq gurr.

30:8 Naq gubh funyg erghea naq borl gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ, naq qb nyy
uvf pbzznaqzragf juvpu V pbzznaq gurr guvf qnl.

30:9 Naq gur YBEQ gul Tbq jvyy znxr gurr cyragrbhf va rirel jbex bs
guvar unaq, va gur sehvg bs gul obql, naq va gur sehvg bs gul pnggyr,
naq va gur sehvg bs gul ynaq, sbe tbbq: sbe gur YBEQ jvyy ntnva
erwbvpr bire gurr sbe tbbq, nf ur erwbvprq bire gul snguref: 30:10 Vs
gubh funyg urnexra hagb gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq, gb xrrc uvf
pbzznaqzragf naq uvf fgnghgrf juvpu ner jevggra va guvf obbx bs gur
ynj, naq vs gubh ghea hagb gur YBEQ gul Tbq jvgu nyy guvar urneg, naq
jvgu nyy gul fbhy.

30:11 Sbe guvf pbzznaqzrag juvpu V pbzznaq gurr guvf qnl, vg vf abg
uvqqra sebz gurr, arvgure vf vg sne bss.

30:12 Vg vf abg va urnira, gung gubh fubhyqrfg fnl, Jub funyy tb hc
sbe hf gb urnira, naq oevat vg hagb hf, gung jr znl urne vg, naq qb
vg?  30:13 Arvgure vf vg orlbaq gur frn, gung gubh fubhyqrfg fnl, Jub
funyy tb bire gur frn sbe hf, naq oevat vg hagb hf, gung jr znl urne
vg, naq qb vg?  30:14 Ohg gur jbeq vf irel avtu hagb gurr, va gul
zbhgu, naq va gul urneg, gung gubh znlrfg qb vg.

30:15 Frr, V unir frg orsber gurr guvf qnl yvsr naq tbbq, naq qrngu
naq rivy; 30:16 Va gung V pbzznaq gurr guvf qnl gb ybir gur YBEQ gul
Tbq, gb jnyx va uvf jnlf, naq gb xrrc uvf pbzznaqzragf naq uvf
fgnghgrf naq uvf whqtzragf, gung gubh znlrfg yvir naq zhygvcyl: naq
gur YBEQ gul Tbq funyy oyrff gurr va gur ynaq juvgure gubh tbrfg gb
cbffrff vg.

30:17 Ohg vs guvar urneg ghea njnl, fb gung gubh jvyg abg urne, ohg
funyg or qenja njnl, naq jbefuvc bgure tbqf, naq freir gurz; 30:18 V
qrabhapr hagb lbh guvf qnl, gung lr funyy fheryl crevfu, naq gung lr
funyy abg cebybat lbhe qnlf hcba gur ynaq, juvgure gubh cnffrfg bire
Wbeqna gb tb gb cbffrff vg.

30:19 V pnyy urnira naq rnegu gb erpbeq guvf qnl ntnvafg lbh, gung V
unir frg orsber lbh yvsr naq qrngu, oyrffvat naq phefvat: gurersber
pubbfr yvsr, gung obgu gubh naq gul frrq znl yvir: 30:20 Gung gubh
znlrfg ybir gur YBEQ gul Tbq, naq gung gubh znlrfg borl uvf ibvpr, naq
gung gubh znlrfg pyrnir hagb uvz: sbe ur vf gul yvsr, naq gur yratgu
bs gul qnlf: gung gubh znlrfg qjryy va gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ fjner
hagb gul snguref, gb Noenunz, gb Vfnnp, naq gb Wnpbo, gb tvir gurz.

31:1 Naq Zbfrf jrag naq fcnxr gurfr jbeqf hagb nyy Vfenry.

31:2 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, V nz na uhaqerq naq gjragl lrnef byq guvf
qnl; V pna ab zber tb bhg naq pbzr va: nyfb gur YBEQ ungu fnvq hagb
zr, Gubh funyg abg tb bire guvf Wbeqna.

31:3 Gur YBEQ gul Tbq, ur jvyy tb bire orsber gurr, naq ur jvyy
qrfgebl gurfr angvbaf sebz orsber gurr, naq gubh funyg cbffrff gurz:
naq Wbfuhn, ur funyy tb bire orsber gurr, nf gur YBEQ ungu fnvq.

31:4 Naq gur YBEQ funyy qb hagb gurz nf ur qvq gb Fvuba naq gb Bt,
xvatf bs gur Nzbevgrf, naq hagb gur ynaq bs gurz, jubz ur qrfgeblrq.

31:5 Naq gur YBEQ funyy tvir gurz hc orsber lbhe snpr, gung lr znl qb
hagb gurz nppbeqvat hagb nyy gur pbzznaqzragf juvpu V unir pbzznaqrq
lbh.

31:6 Or fgebat naq bs n tbbq pbhentr, srne abg, abe or nsenvq bs gurz:
sbe gur YBEQ gul Tbq, ur vg vf gung qbgu tb jvgu gurr; ur jvyy abg
snvy gurr, abe sbefnxr gurr.

31:7 Naq Zbfrf pnyyrq hagb Wbfuhn, naq fnvq hagb uvz va gur fvtug bs
nyy Vfenry, Or fgebat naq bs n tbbq pbhentr: sbe gubh zhfg tb jvgu
guvf crbcyr hagb gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ ungu fjbea hagb gurve snguref
gb tvir gurz; naq gubh funyg pnhfr gurz gb vaurevg vg.

31:8 Naq gur YBEQ, ur vg vf gung qbgu tb orsber gurr; ur jvyy or jvgu
gurr, ur jvyy abg snvy gurr, arvgure sbefnxr gurr: srne abg, arvgure
or qvfznlrq.

31:9 Naq Zbfrf jebgr guvf ynj, naq qryvirerq vg hagb gur cevrfgf gur
fbaf bs Yriv, juvpu oner gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ, naq hagb
nyy gur ryqref bs Vfenry.

31:10 Naq Zbfrf pbzznaqrq gurz, fnlvat, Ng gur raq bs rirel frira
lrnef, va gur fbyrzavgl bs gur lrne bs eryrnfr, va gur srnfg bs
gnoreanpyrf, 31:11 Jura nyy Vfenry vf pbzr gb nccrne orsber gur YBEQ
gul Tbq va gur cynpr juvpu ur funyy pubbfr, gubh funyg ernq guvf ynj
orsber nyy Vfenry va gurve urnevat.

31:12 Tngure gur crbcyr gbtrgure, zra naq jbzra, naq puvyqera, naq gul
fgenatre gung vf jvguva gul tngrf, gung gurl znl urne, naq gung gurl
znl yrnea, naq srne gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, naq bofreir gb qb nyy gur jbeqf
bs guvf ynj: 31:13 Naq gung gurve puvyqera, juvpu unir abg xabja nal
guvat, znl urne, naq yrnea gb srne gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, nf ybat nf lr
yvir va gur ynaq juvgure lr tb bire Wbeqna gb cbffrff vg.

31:14 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Orubyq, gul qnlf nccebnpu gung
gubh zhfg qvr: pnyy Wbfuhn, naq cerfrag lbhefryirf va gur gnoreanpyr
bs gur pbatertngvba, gung V znl tvir uvz n punetr. Naq Zbfrf naq
Wbfuhn jrag, naq cerfragrq gurzfryirf va gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba.

31:15 Naq gur YBEQ nccrnerq va gur gnoreanpyr va n cvyyne bs n pybhq:
naq gur cvyyne bs gur pybhq fgbbq bire gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr.

31:16 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf, Orubyq, gubh funyg fyrrc jvgu gul
snguref; naq guvf crbcyr jvyy evfr hc, naq tb n jubevat nsgre gur tbqf
bs gur fgenatref bs gur ynaq, juvgure gurl tb gb or nzbat gurz, naq
jvyy sbefnxr zr, naq oernx zl pbiranag juvpu V unir znqr jvgu gurz.

31:17 Gura zl natre funyy or xvaqyrq ntnvafg gurz va gung qnl, naq V
jvyy sbefnxr gurz, naq V jvyy uvqr zl snpr sebz gurz, naq gurl funyy
or qribherq, naq znal rivyf naq gebhoyrf funyy orsnyy gurz; fb gung
gurl jvyy fnl va gung qnl, Ner abg gurfr rivyf pbzr hcba hf, orpnhfr
bhe Tbq vf abg nzbat hf?  31:18 Naq V jvyy fheryl uvqr zl snpr va gung
qnl sbe nyy gur rivyf juvpu gurl funyy unir jebhtug, va gung gurl ner
ghearq hagb bgure tbqf.

31:19 Abj gurersber jevgr lr guvf fbat sbe lbh, naq grnpu vg gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry: chg vg va gurve zbhguf, gung guvf fbat znl or n
jvgarff sbe zr ntnvafg gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

31:20 Sbe jura V funyy unir oebhtug gurz vagb gur ynaq juvpu V fjner
hagb gurve snguref, gung sybjrgu jvgu zvyx naq ubarl; naq gurl funyy
unir rngra naq svyyrq gurzfryirf, naq jnkra sng; gura jvyy gurl ghea
hagb bgure tbqf, naq freir gurz, naq cebibxr zr, naq oernx zl
pbiranag.

31:21 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, jura znal rivyf naq gebhoyrf ner
orsnyyra gurz, gung guvf fbat funyy grfgvsl ntnvafg gurz nf n jvgarff;
sbe vg funyy abg or sbetbggra bhg bs gur zbhguf bs gurve frrq: sbe V
xabj gurve vzntvangvba juvpu gurl tb nobhg, rira abj, orsber V unir
oebhtug gurz vagb gur ynaq juvpu V fjner.

31:22 Zbfrf gurersber jebgr guvf fbat gur fnzr qnl, naq gnhtug vg gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry.

31:23 Naq ur tnir Wbfuhn gur fba bs Aha n punetr, naq fnvq, Or fgebat
naq bs n tbbq pbhentr: sbe gubh funyg oevat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry
vagb gur ynaq juvpu V fjner hagb gurz: naq V jvyy or jvgu gurr.

31:24 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Zbfrf unq znqr na raq bs jevgvat gur
jbeqf bs guvf ynj va n obbx, hagvy gurl jrer svavfurq, 31:25 Gung
Zbfrf pbzznaqrq gur Yrivgrf, juvpu oner gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur
YBEQ, fnlvat, 31:26 Gnxr guvf obbx bs gur ynj, naq chg vg va gur fvqr
bs gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, gung vg znl or gurer
sbe n jvgarff ntnvafg gurr.

31:27 Sbe V xabj gul eroryyvba, naq gul fgvss arpx: orubyq, juvyr V nz
lrg nyvir jvgu lbh guvf qnl, lr unir orra eroryyvbhf ntnvafg gur YBEQ;
naq ubj zhpu zber nsgre zl qrngu?  31:28 Tngure hagb zr nyy gur ryqref
bs lbhe gevorf, naq lbhe bssvpref, gung V znl fcrnx gurfr jbeqf va
gurve rnef, naq pnyy urnira naq rnegu gb erpbeq ntnvafg gurz.

31:29 Sbe V xabj gung nsgre zl qrngu lr jvyy hggreyl pbeehcg
lbhefryirf, naq ghea nfvqr sebz gur jnl juvpu V unir pbzznaqrq lbh;
naq rivy jvyy orsnyy lbh va gur ynggre qnlf; orpnhfr lr jvyy qb rivy
va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, gb cebibxr uvz gb natre guebhtu gur jbex bs
lbhe unaqf.

31:30 Naq Zbfrf fcnxr va gur rnef bs nyy gur pbatertngvba bs Vfenry
gur jbeqf bs guvf fbat, hagvy gurl jrer raqrq.

32:1 Tvir rne, B lr urniraf, naq V jvyy fcrnx; naq urne, B rnegu, gur
jbeqf bs zl zbhgu.

32:2 Zl qbpgevar funyy qebc nf gur enva, zl fcrrpu funyy qvfgvy nf gur
qrj, nf gur fznyy enva hcba gur graqre ureo, naq nf gur fubjref hcba
gur tenff: 32:3 Orpnhfr V jvyy choyvfu gur anzr bs gur YBEQ: nfpevor
lr terngarff hagb bhe Tbq.

32:4 Ur vf gur Ebpx, uvf jbex vf cresrpg: sbe nyy uvf jnlf ner
whqtzrag: n Tbq bs gehgu naq jvgubhg vavdhvgl, whfg naq evtug vf ur.

32:5 Gurl unir pbeehcgrq gurzfryirf, gurve fcbg vf abg gur fcbg bs uvf
puvyqera: gurl ner n creirefr naq pebbxrq trarengvba.

32:6 Qb lr guhf erdhvgr gur YBEQ, B sbbyvfu crbcyr naq hajvfr? vf abg
ur gul sngure gung ungu obhtug gurr? ungu ur abg znqr gurr, naq
rfgnoyvfurq gurr?  32:7 Erzrzore gur qnlf bs byq, pbafvqre gur lrnef
bs znal trarengvbaf: nfx gul sngure, naq ur jvyy furj gurr; gul
ryqref, naq gurl jvyy gryy gurr.

32:8 Jura gur Zbfg Uvtu qvivqrq gb gur angvbaf gurve vaurevgnapr, jura
ur frcnengrq gur fbaf bs Nqnz, ur frg gur obhaqf bs gur crbcyr
nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

32:9 Sbe gur YBEQ'f cbegvba vf uvf crbcyr; Wnpbo vf gur ybg bs uvf
vaurevgnapr.

32:10 Ur sbhaq uvz va n qrfreg ynaq, naq va gur jnfgr ubjyvat
jvyqrearff; ur yrq uvz nobhg, ur vafgehpgrq uvz, ur xrcg uvz nf gur
nccyr bs uvf rlr.

32:11 Nf na rntyr fgveergu hc ure arfg, syhggrergu bire ure lbhat,
fcernqrgu noebnq ure jvatf, gnxrgu gurz, ornergu gurz ba ure jvatf:
32:12 Fb gur YBEQ nybar qvq yrnq uvz, naq gurer jnf ab fgenatr tbq
jvgu uvz.

32:13 Ur znqr uvz evqr ba gur uvtu cynprf bs gur rnegu, gung ur zvtug
rng gur vapernfr bs gur svryqf; naq ur znqr uvz gb fhpx ubarl bhg bs
gur ebpx, naq bvy bhg bs gur syvagl ebpx; 32:14 Ohggre bs xvar, naq
zvyx bs furrc, jvgu sng bs ynzof, naq enzf bs gur oerrq bs Onfuna, naq
tbngf, jvgu gur sng bs xvqarlf bs jurng; naq gubh qvqfg qevax gur cher
oybbq bs gur tencr.

32:15 Ohg Wrfuheha jnkrq sng, naq xvpxrq: gubh neg jnkra sng, gubh neg
tebja guvpx, gubh neg pbirerq jvgu sngarff; gura ur sbefbbx Tbq juvpu
znqr uvz, naq yvtugyl rfgrrzrq gur Ebpx bs uvf fnyingvba.

32:16 Gurl cebibxrq uvz gb wrnybhfl jvgu fgenatr tbqf, jvgu
nobzvangvbaf cebibxrq gurl uvz gb natre.

32:17 Gurl fnpevsvprq hagb qrivyf, abg gb Tbq; gb tbqf jubz gurl xarj
abg, gb arj tbqf gung pnzr arjyl hc, jubz lbhe snguref srnerq abg.

32:18 Bs gur Ebpx gung ortng gurr gubh neg hazvaqshy, naq unfg
sbetbggra Tbq gung sbezrq gurr.

32:19 Naq jura gur YBEQ fnj vg, ur noubeerq gurz, orpnhfr bs gur
cebibxvat bs uvf fbaf, naq bs uvf qnhtugref.

32:20 Naq ur fnvq, V jvyy uvqr zl snpr sebz gurz, V jvyy frr jung
gurve raq funyy or: sbe gurl ner n irel sebjneq trarengvba, puvyqera
va jubz vf ab snvgu.

32:21 Gurl unir zbirq zr gb wrnybhfl jvgu gung juvpu vf abg Tbq; gurl
unir cebibxrq zr gb natre jvgu gurve inavgvrf: naq V jvyy zbir gurz gb
wrnybhfl jvgu gubfr juvpu ner abg n crbcyr; V jvyy cebibxr gurz gb
natre jvgu n sbbyvfu angvba.

32:22 Sbe n sver vf xvaqyrq va zvar natre, naq funyy ohea hagb gur
ybjrfg uryy, naq funyy pbafhzr gur rnegu jvgu ure vapernfr, naq frg ba
sver gur sbhaqngvbaf bs gur zbhagnvaf.

32:23 V jvyy urnc zvfpuvrsf hcba gurz; V jvyy fcraq zvar neebjf hcba
gurz.

32:24 Gurl funyy or oheag jvgu uhatre, naq qribherq jvgu oheavat urng,
naq jvgu ovggre qrfgehpgvba: V jvyy nyfb fraq gur grrgu bs ornfgf hcba
gurz, jvgu gur cbvfba bs frecragf bs gur qhfg.

32:25 Gur fjbeq jvgubhg, naq greebe jvguva, funyy qrfgebl obgu gur
lbhat zna naq gur ivetva, gur fhpxyvat nyfb jvgu gur zna bs tenl
unvef.

32:26 V fnvq, V jbhyq fpnggre gurz vagb pbearef, V jbhyq znxr gur
erzrzoenapr bs gurz gb prnfr sebz nzbat zra: 32:27 Jrer vg abg gung V
srnerq gur jengu bs gur rarzl, yrfg gurve nqirefnevrf fubhyq orunir
gurzfryirf fgenatryl, naq yrfg gurl fubhyq fnl, Bhe unaq vf uvtu, naq
gur YBEQ ungu abg qbar nyy guvf.

32:28 Sbe gurl ner n angvba ibvq bs pbhafry, arvgure vf gurer nal
haqrefgnaqvat va gurz.

32:29 B gung gurl jrer jvfr, gung gurl haqrefgbbq guvf, gung gurl
jbhyq pbafvqre gurve ynggre raq!  32:30 Ubj fubhyq bar punfr n
gubhfnaq, naq gjb chg gra gubhfnaq gb syvtug, rkprcg gurve Ebpx unq
fbyq gurz, naq gur YBEQ unq fuhg gurz hc?  32:31 Sbe gurve ebpx vf abg
nf bhe Ebpx, rira bhe rarzvrf gurzfryirf orvat whqtrf.

32:32 Sbe gurve ivar vf bs gur ivar bs Fbqbz, naq bs gur svryqf bs
Tbzbeenu: gurve tencrf ner tencrf bs tnyy, gurve pyhfgref ner ovggre:
32:33 Gurve jvar vf gur cbvfba bs qentbaf, naq gur pehry irabz bs
nfcf.

32:34 Vf abg guvf ynvq hc va fgber jvgu zr, naq frnyrq hc nzbat zl
gernfherf?  32:35 Gb zr orybatrgu iratrnapr naq erpbzcrapr; gurve sbbg
funyy fyvqr va qhr gvzr: sbe gur qnl bs gurve pnynzvgl vf ng unaq, naq
gur guvatf gung funyy pbzr hcba gurz znxr unfgr.

32:36 Sbe gur YBEQ funyy whqtr uvf crbcyr, naq ercrag uvzfrys sbe uvf
freinagf, jura ur frrgu gung gurve cbjre vf tbar, naq gurer vf abar
fuhg hc, be yrsg.

32:37 Naq ur funyy fnl, Jurer ner gurve tbqf, gurve ebpx va jubz gurl
gehfgrq, 32:38 Juvpu qvq rng gur sng bs gurve fnpevsvprf, naq qenax
gur jvar bs gurve qevax bssrevatf? yrg gurz evfr hc naq uryc lbh, naq
or lbhe cebgrpgvba.

32:39 Frr abj gung V, rira V, nz ur, naq gurer vf ab tbq jvgu zr: V
xvyy, naq V znxr nyvir; V jbhaq, naq V urny: arvgure vf gurer nal gung
pna qryvire bhg bs zl unaq.

32:40 Sbe V yvsg hc zl unaq gb urnira, naq fnl, V yvir sbe rire.

32:41 Vs V jurg zl tyvggrevat fjbeq, naq zvar unaq gnxr ubyq ba
whqtzrag; V jvyy eraqre iratrnapr gb zvar rarzvrf, naq jvyy erjneq
gurz gung ungr zr.

32:42 V jvyy znxr zvar neebjf qehax jvgu oybbq, naq zl fjbeq funyy
qribhe syrfu; naq gung jvgu gur oybbq bs gur fynva naq bs gur
pncgvirf, sebz gur ortvaavat bs eriratrf hcba gur rarzl.

32:43 Erwbvpr, B lr angvbaf, jvgu uvf crbcyr: sbe ur jvyy niratr gur
oybbq bs uvf freinagf, naq jvyy eraqre iratrnapr gb uvf nqirefnevrf,
naq jvyy or zrepvshy hagb uvf ynaq, naq gb uvf crbcyr.

32:44 Naq Zbfrf pnzr naq fcnxr nyy gur jbeqf bs guvf fbat va gur rnef
bs gur crbcyr, ur, naq Ubfurn gur fba bs Aha.

32:45 Naq Zbfrf znqr na raq bs fcrnxvat nyy gurfr jbeqf gb nyy Vfenry:
32:46 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Frg lbhe urnegf hagb nyy gur jbeqf juvpu
V grfgvsl nzbat lbh guvf qnl, juvpu lr funyy pbzznaq lbhe puvyqera gb
bofreir gb qb, nyy gur jbeqf bs guvf ynj.

32:47 Sbe vg vf abg n inva guvat sbe lbh; orpnhfr vg vf lbhe yvsr: naq
guebhtu guvf guvat lr funyy cebybat lbhe qnlf va gur ynaq, juvgure lr
tb bire Wbeqna gb cbffrff vg.

32:48 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Zbfrf gung frysfnzr qnl, fnlvat, 32:49
Trg gurr hc vagb guvf zbhagnva Nonevz, hagb zbhag Arob, juvpu vf va
gur ynaq bs Zbno, gung vf bire ntnvafg Wrevpub; naq orubyq gur ynaq bs
Pnanna, juvpu V tvir hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry sbe n cbffrffvba:
32:50 Naq qvr va gur zbhag juvgure gubh tbrfg hc, naq or tngurerq hagb
gul crbcyr; nf Nneba gul oebgure qvrq va zbhag Ube, naq jnf tngurerq
hagb uvf crbcyr: 32:51 Orpnhfr lr gerfcnffrq ntnvafg zr nzbat gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry ng gur jngref bs ZrevonuXnqrfu, va gur jvyqrearff
bs Mva; orpnhfr lr fnapgvsvrq zr abg va gur zvqfg bs gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry.

32:52 Lrg gubh funyg frr gur ynaq orsber gurr; ohg gubh funyg abg tb
guvgure hagb gur ynaq juvpu V tvir gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

33:1 Naq guvf vf gur oyrffvat, jurerjvgu Zbfrf gur zna bs Tbq oyrffrq
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry orsber uvf qrngu.

33:2 Naq ur fnvq, Gur YBEQ pnzr sebz Fvanv, naq ebfr hc sebz Frve hagb
gurz; ur fuvarq sbegu sebz zbhag Cnena, naq ur pnzr jvgu gra gubhfnaqf
bs fnvagf: sebz uvf evtug unaq jrag n svrel ynj sbe gurz.

33:3 Lrn, ur ybirq gur crbcyr; nyy uvf fnvagf ner va gul unaq: naq
gurl fng qbja ng gul srrg; rirel bar funyy erprvir bs gul jbeqf.

33:4 Zbfrf pbzznaqrq hf n ynj, rira gur vaurevgnapr bs gur
pbatertngvba bs Wnpbo.

33:5 Naq ur jnf xvat va Wrfuheha, jura gur urnqf bs gur crbcyr naq gur
gevorf bs Vfenry jrer tngurerq gbtrgure.

33:6 Yrg Erhora yvir, naq abg qvr; naq yrg abg uvf zra or srj.

33:7 Naq guvf vf gur oyrffvat bs Whqnu: naq ur fnvq, Urne, YBEQ, gur
ibvpr bs Whqnu, naq oevat uvz hagb uvf crbcyr: yrg uvf unaqf or
fhssvpvrag sbe uvz; naq or gubh na uryc gb uvz sebz uvf rarzvrf.

33:8 Naq bs Yriv ur fnvq, Yrg gul Guhzzvz naq gul Hevz or jvgu gul
ubyl bar, jubz gubh qvqfg cebir ng Znffnu, naq jvgu jubz gubh qvqfg
fgevir ng gur jngref bs Zrevonu; 33:9 Jub fnvq hagb uvf sngure naq gb
uvf zbgure, V unir abg frra uvz; arvgure qvq ur npxabjyrqtr uvf
oerguera, abe xarj uvf bja puvyqera: sbe gurl unir bofreirq gul jbeq,
naq xrcg gul pbiranag.

33:10 Gurl funyy grnpu Wnpbo gul whqtzragf, naq Vfenry gul ynj: gurl
funyy chg vaprafr orsber gurr, naq jubyr oheag fnpevsvpr hcba guvar
nygne.

33:11 Oyrff, YBEQ, uvf fhofgnapr, naq npprcg gur jbex bs uvf unaqf;
fzvgr guebhtu gur ybvaf bs gurz gung evfr ntnvafg uvz, naq bs gurz
gung ungr uvz, gung gurl evfr abg ntnva.

33:12 Naq bs Orawnzva ur fnvq, Gur orybirq bs gur YBEQ funyy qjryy va
fnsrgl ol uvz; naq gur Ybeq funyy pbire uvz nyy gur qnl ybat, naq ur
funyy qjryy orgjrra uvf fubhyqref.

33:13 Naq bs Wbfrcu ur fnvq, Oyrffrq bs gur YBEQ or uvf ynaq, sbe gur
cerpvbhf guvatf bs urnira, sbe gur qrj, naq sbe gur qrrc gung pbhpurgu
orarngu, 33:14 Naq sbe gur cerpvbhf sehvgf oebhtug sbegu ol gur fha,
naq sbe gur cerpvbhf guvatf chg sbegu ol gur zbba, 33:15 Naq sbe gur
puvrs guvatf bs gur napvrag zbhagnvaf, naq sbe gur cerpvbhf guvatf bs
gur ynfgvat uvyyf, 33:16 Naq sbe gur cerpvbhf guvatf bs gur rnegu naq
shyarff gurerbs, naq sbe gur tbbq jvyy bs uvz gung qjryg va gur ohfu:
yrg gur oyrffvat pbzr hcba gur urnq bs Wbfrcu, naq hcba gur gbc bs gur
urnq bs uvz gung jnf frcnengrq sebz uvf oerguera.

33:17 Uvf tybel vf yvxr gur svefgyvat bs uvf ohyybpx, naq uvf ubeaf
ner yvxr gur ubeaf bs havpbeaf: jvgu gurz ur funyy chfu gur crbcyr
gbtrgure gb gur raqf bs gur rnegu: naq gurl ner gur gra gubhfnaqf bs
Rcuenvz, naq gurl ner gur gubhfnaqf bs Znanffru.

33:18 Naq bs Mrohyha ur fnvq, Erwbvpr, Mrohyha, va gul tbvat bhg; naq,
Vffnpune, va gul gragf.

33:19 Gurl funyy pnyy gur crbcyr hagb gur zbhagnva; gurer gurl funyy
bssre fnpevsvprf bs evtugrbhfarff: sbe gurl funyy fhpx bs gur
nohaqnapr bs gur frnf, naq bs gernfherf uvq va gur fnaq.

33:20 Naq bs Tnq ur fnvq, Oyrffrq or ur gung raynetrgu Tnq: ur
qjryyrgu nf n yvba, naq grnergu gur nez jvgu gur pebja bs gur urnq.

33:21 Naq ur cebivqrq gur svefg cneg sbe uvzfrys, orpnhfr gurer, va n
cbegvba bs gur ynjtvire, jnf ur frngrq; naq ur pnzr jvgu gur urnqf bs
gur crbcyr, ur rkrphgrq gur whfgvpr bs gur YBEQ, naq uvf whqtzragf
jvgu Vfenry.

33:22 Naq bs Qna ur fnvq, Qna vf n yvba'f juryc: ur funyy yrnc sebz
Onfuna.

33:23 Naq bs Ancugnyv ur fnvq, B Ancugnyv, fngvfsvrq jvgu snibhe, naq
shyy jvgu gur oyrffvat bs gur YBEQ: cbffrff gubh gur jrfg naq gur
fbhgu.

33:24 Naq bs Nfure ur fnvq, Yrg Nfure or oyrffrq jvgu puvyqera; yrg
uvz or npprcgnoyr gb uvf oerguera, naq yrg uvz qvc uvf sbbg va bvy.

33:25 Gul fubrf funyy or veba naq oenff; naq nf gul qnlf, fb funyy gul
fgeratgu or.

33:26 Gurer vf abar yvxr hagb gur Tbq bs Wrfuheha, jub evqrgu hcba gur
urnira va gul uryc, naq va uvf rkpryyrapl ba gur fxl.

33:27 Gur rgreany Tbq vf gul ershtr, naq haqrearngu ner gur
rireynfgvat nezf: naq ur funyy guehfg bhg gur rarzl sebz orsber gurr;
naq funyy fnl, Qrfgebl gurz.

33:28 Vfenry gura funyy qjryy va fnsrgl nybar: gur sbhagnva bs Wnpbo
funyy or hcba n ynaq bs pbea naq jvar; nyfb uvf urniraf funyy qebc
qbja qrj.

33:29 Unccl neg gubh, B Vfenry: jub vf yvxr hagb gurr, B crbcyr fnirq
ol gur YBEQ, gur fuvryq bs gul uryc, naq jub vf gur fjbeq bs gul
rkpryyrapl! naq guvar rarzvrf funyy or sbhaq yvnef hagb gurr; naq gubh
funyg gernq hcba gurve uvtu cynprf.

34:1 Naq Zbfrf jrag hc sebz gur cynvaf bs Zbno hagb gur zbhagnva bs
Arob, gb gur gbc bs Cvftnu, gung vf bire ntnvafg Wrevpub. Naq gur YBEQ
furjrq uvz nyy gur ynaq bs Tvyrnq, hagb Qna, 34:2 Naq nyy Ancugnyv,
naq gur ynaq bs Rcuenvz, naq Znanffru, naq nyy gur ynaq bs Whqnu, hagb
gur hgzbfg frn, 34:3 Naq gur fbhgu, naq gur cynva bs gur inyyrl bs
Wrevpub, gur pvgl bs cnyz gerrf, hagb Mbne.

34:4 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb uvz, Guvf vf gur ynaq juvpu V fjner hagb
Noenunz, hagb Vfnnp, naq hagb Wnpbo, fnlvat, V jvyy tvir vg hagb gul
frrq: V unir pnhfrq gurr gb frr vg jvgu guvar rlrf, ohg gubh funyg abg
tb bire guvgure.

34:5 Fb Zbfrf gur freinag bs gur YBEQ qvrq gurer va gur ynaq bs Zbno,
nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ.

34:6 Naq ur ohevrq uvz va n inyyrl va gur ynaq bs Zbno, bire ntnvafg
Orgucrbe: ohg ab zna xabjrgu bs uvf frchypuer hagb guvf qnl.

34:7 Naq Zbfrf jnf na uhaqerq naq gjragl lrnef byq jura ur qvrq: uvf
rlr jnf abg qvz, abe uvf angheny sbepr nongrq.

34:8 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jrcg sbe Zbfrf va gur cynvaf bs Zbno
guvegl qnlf: fb gur qnlf bs jrrcvat naq zbheavat sbe Zbfrf jrer raqrq.

34:9 Naq Wbfuhn gur fba bs Aha jnf shyy bs gur fcvevg bs jvfqbz; sbe
Zbfrf unq ynvq uvf unaqf hcba uvz: naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry
urnexrarq hagb uvz, naq qvq nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

34:10 Naq gurer nebfr abg n cebcurg fvapr va Vfenry yvxr hagb Zbfrf,
jubz gur YBEQ xarj snpr gb snpr, 34:11 Va nyy gur fvtaf naq gur
jbaqref, juvpu gur YBEQ frag uvz gb qb va gur ynaq bs Rtlcg gb
Cunenbu, naq gb nyy uvf freinagf, naq gb nyy uvf ynaq, 34:12 Naq va
nyy gung zvtugl unaq, naq va nyy gur terng greebe juvpu Zbfrf furjrq
va gur fvtug bs nyy Vfenry.




Gur Obbx bs Wbfuhn


1:1 Abj nsgre gur qrngu bs Zbfrf gur freinag bs gur YBEQ vg pnzr gb
cnff, gung gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Wbfuhn gur fba bs Aha, Zbfrf' zvavfgre,
fnlvat, 1:2 Zbfrf zl freinag vf qrnq; abj gurersber nevfr, tb bire
guvf Wbeqna, gubh, naq nyy guvf crbcyr, hagb gur ynaq juvpu V qb tvir
gb gurz, rira gb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

1:3 Rirel cynpr gung gur fbyr bs lbhe sbbg funyy gernq hcba, gung unir
V tvira hagb lbh, nf V fnvq hagb Zbfrf.

1:4 Sebz gur jvyqrearff naq guvf Yronaba rira hagb gur terng evire,
gur evire Rhcuengrf, nyy gur ynaq bs gur Uvggvgrf, naq hagb gur terng
frn gbjneq gur tbvat qbja bs gur fha, funyy or lbhe pbnfg.

1:5 Gurer funyy abg nal zna or noyr gb fgnaq orsber gurr nyy gur qnlf
bs gul yvsr: nf V jnf jvgu Zbfrf, fb V jvyy or jvgu gurr: V jvyy abg
snvy gurr, abe sbefnxr gurr.

1:6 Or fgebat naq bs n tbbq pbhentr: sbe hagb guvf crbcyr funyg gubh
qvivqr sbe na vaurevgnapr gur ynaq, juvpu V fjner hagb gurve snguref
gb tvir gurz.

1:7 Bayl or gubh fgebat naq irel pbhentrbhf, gung gubh znlrfg bofreir
gb qb nppbeqvat gb nyy gur ynj, juvpu Zbfrf zl freinag pbzznaqrq gurr:
ghea abg sebz vg gb gur evtug unaq be gb gur yrsg, gung gubh znlrfg
cebfcre jvgurefbrire gubh tbrfg.

1:8 Guvf obbx bs gur ynj funyy abg qrcneg bhg bs gul zbhgu; ohg gubh
funyg zrqvgngr gurerva qnl naq avtug, gung gubh znlrfg bofreir gb qb
nppbeqvat gb nyy gung vf jevggra gurerva: sbe gura gubh funyg znxr gul
jnl cebfcrebhf, naq gura gubh funyg unir tbbq fhpprff.

1:9 Unir abg V pbzznaqrq gurr? Or fgebat naq bs n tbbq pbhentr; or abg
nsenvq, arvgure or gubh qvfznlrq: sbe gur YBEQ gul Tbq vf jvgu gurr
juvgurefbrire gubh tbrfg.

1:10 Gura Wbfuhn pbzznaqrq gur bssvpref bs gur crbcyr, fnlvat, 1:11
Cnff guebhtu gur ubfg, naq pbzznaq gur crbcyr, fnlvat, Cercner lbh
ivpghnyf; sbe jvguva guerr qnlf lr funyy cnff bire guvf Wbeqna, gb tb
va gb cbffrff gur ynaq, juvpu gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq tvirgu lbh gb cbffrff
vg.

1:12 Naq gb gur Erhoravgrf, naq gb gur Tnqvgrf, naq gb unys gur gevor
bs Znanffru, fcnxr Wbfuhn, fnlvat, 1:13 Erzrzore gur jbeq juvpu Zbfrf
gur freinag bs gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq lbh, fnlvat, Gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq ungu
tvira lbh erfg, naq ungu tvira lbh guvf ynaq.

1:14 Lbhe jvirf, lbhe yvggyr barf, naq lbhe pnggyr, funyy erznva va
gur ynaq juvpu Zbfrf tnir lbh ba guvf fvqr Wbeqna; ohg lr funyy cnff
orsber lbhe oerguera nezrq, nyy gur zvtugl zra bs inybhe, naq uryc
gurz; 1:15 Hagvy gur YBEQ unir tvira lbhe oerguera erfg, nf ur ungu
tvira lbh, naq gurl nyfb unir cbffrffrq gur ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ lbhe
Tbq tvirgu gurz: gura lr funyy erghea hagb gur ynaq bs lbhe
cbffrffvba, naq rawbl vg, juvpu Zbfrf gur YBEQ'f freinag tnir lbh ba
guvf fvqr Wbeqna gbjneq gur fhaevfvat.

1:16 Naq gurl nafjrerq Wbfuhn, fnlvat, Nyy gung gubh pbzznaqrfg hf jr
jvyy qb, naq juvgurefbrire gubh fraqrfg hf, jr jvyy tb.

1:17 Nppbeqvat nf jr urnexrarq hagb Zbfrf va nyy guvatf, fb jvyy jr
urnexra hagb gurr: bayl gur YBEQ gul Tbq or jvgu gurr, nf ur jnf jvgu
Zbfrf.

1:18 Jubfbrire ur or gung qbgu erory ntnvafg gul pbzznaqzrag, naq jvyy
abg urnexra hagb gul jbeqf va nyy gung gubh pbzznaqrfg uvz, ur funyy
or chg gb qrngu: bayl or fgebat naq bs n tbbq pbhentr.

2:1 Naq Wbfuhn gur fba bs Aha frag bhg bs Fuvggvz gjb zra gb fcl
frpergyl, fnlvat, Tb ivrj gur ynaq, rira Wrevpub. Naq gurl jrag, naq
pnzr vagb na uneybg'f ubhfr, anzrq Enuno, naq ybqtrq gurer.

2:2 Naq vg jnf gbyq gur xvat bs Wrevpub, fnlvat, Orubyq, gurer pnzr
zra va uvgure gb avtug bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry gb frnepu bhg gur
pbhagel.

2:3 Naq gur xvat bs Wrevpub frag hagb Enuno, fnlvat, Oevat sbegu gur
zra gung ner pbzr gb gurr, juvpu ner ragrerq vagb guvar ubhfr: sbe
gurl or pbzr gb frnepu bhg nyy gur pbhagel.

2:4 Naq gur jbzna gbbx gur gjb zra, naq uvq gurz, naq fnvq guhf, Gurer
pnzr zra hagb zr, ohg V jvfg abg jurapr gurl jrer: 2:5 Naq vg pnzr gb
cnff nobhg gur gvzr bs fuhggvat bs gur tngr, jura vg jnf qnex, gung
gur zra jrag bhg: juvgure gur zra jrag V jbg abg: chefhr nsgre gurz
dhvpxyl; sbe lr funyy biregnxr gurz.

2:6 Ohg fur unq oebhtug gurz hc gb gur ebbs bs gur ubhfr, naq uvq gurz
jvgu gur fgnyxf bs synk, juvpu fur unq ynvq va beqre hcba gur ebbs.

2:7 Naq gur zra chefhrq nsgre gurz gur jnl gb Wbeqna hagb gur sbeqf:
naq nf fbba nf gurl juvpu chefhrq nsgre gurz jrer tbar bhg, gurl fuhg
gur tngr.

2:8 Naq orsber gurl jrer ynvq qbja, fur pnzr hc hagb gurz hcba gur
ebbs; 2:9 Naq fur fnvq hagb gur zra, V xabj gung gur YBEQ ungu tvira
lbh gur ynaq, naq gung lbhe greebe vf snyyra hcba hf, naq gung nyy gur
vaunovgnagf bs gur ynaq snvag orpnhfr bs lbh.

2:10 Sbe jr unir urneq ubj gur YBEQ qevrq hc gur jngre bs gur Erq frn
sbe lbh, jura lr pnzr bhg bs Rtlcg; naq jung lr qvq hagb gur gjb xvatf
bs gur Nzbevgrf, gung jrer ba gur bgure fvqr Wbeqna, Fvuba naq Bt,
jubz lr hggreyl qrfgeblrq.

2:11 Naq nf fbba nf jr unq urneq gurfr guvatf, bhe urnegf qvq zryg,
arvgure qvq gurer erznva nal zber pbhentr va nal zna, orpnhfr bs lbh:
sbe gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, ur vf Tbq va urnira nobir, naq va rnegu
orarngu.

2:12 Abj gurersber, V cenl lbh, fjrne hagb zr ol gur YBEQ, fvapr V
unir furjrq lbh xvaqarff, gung lr jvyy nyfb furj xvaqarff hagb zl
sngure'f ubhfr, naq tvir zr n gehr gbxra: 2:13 Naq gung lr jvyy fnir
nyvir zl sngure, naq zl zbgure, naq zl oerguera, naq zl fvfgref, naq
nyy gung gurl unir, naq qryvire bhe yvirf sebz qrngu.

2:14 Naq gur zra nafjrerq ure, Bhe yvsr sbe lbhef, vs lr hggre abg
guvf bhe ohfvarff. Naq vg funyy or, jura gur YBEQ ungu tvira hf gur
ynaq, gung jr jvyy qrny xvaqyl naq gehyl jvgu gurr.

2:15 Gura fur yrg gurz qbja ol n pbeq guebhtu gur jvaqbj: sbe ure
ubhfr jnf hcba gur gbja jnyy, naq fur qjryg hcba gur jnyy.

2:16 Naq fur fnvq hagb gurz, Trg lbh gb gur zbhagnva, yrfg gur
chefhref zrrg lbh; naq uvqr lbhefryirf gurer guerr qnlf, hagvy gur
chefhref or erghearq: naq nsgrejneq znl lr tb lbhe jnl.

2:17 Naq gur zra fnvq hagb ure, Jr jvyy or oynzryrff bs guvf guvar
bngu juvpu gubh unfg znqr hf fjrne.

2:18 Orubyq, jura jr pbzr vagb gur ynaq, gubh funyg ovaq guvf yvar bs
fpneyrg guernq va gur jvaqbj juvpu gubh qvqfg yrg hf qbja ol: naq gubh
funyg oevat gul sngure, naq gul zbgure, naq gul oerguera, naq nyy gul
sngure'f ubhfrubyq, ubzr hagb gurr.

2:19 Naq vg funyy or, gung jubfbrire funyy tb bhg bs gur qbbef bs gul
ubhfr vagb gur fgerrg, uvf oybbq funyy or hcba uvf urnq, naq jr jvyy
or thvygyrff: naq jubfbrire funyy or jvgu gurr va gur ubhfr, uvf oybbq
funyy or ba bhe urnq, vs nal unaq or hcba uvz.

2:20 Naq vs gubh hggre guvf bhe ohfvarff, gura jr jvyy or dhvg bs
guvar bngu juvpu gubh unfg znqr hf gb fjrne.

2:21 Naq fur fnvq, Nppbeqvat hagb lbhe jbeqf, fb or vg. Naq fur frag
gurz njnl, naq gurl qrcnegrq: naq fur obhaq gur fpneyrg yvar va gur
jvaqbj.

2:22 Naq gurl jrag, naq pnzr hagb gur zbhagnva, naq nobqr gurer guerr
qnlf, hagvy gur chefhref jrer erghearq: naq gur chefhref fbhtug gurz
guebhtubhg nyy gur jnl, ohg sbhaq gurz abg.

2:23 Fb gur gjb zra erghearq, naq qrfpraqrq sebz gur zbhagnva, naq
cnffrq bire, naq pnzr gb Wbfuhn gur fba bs Aha, naq gbyq uvz nyy
guvatf gung orsryy gurz: 2:24 Naq gurl fnvq hagb Wbfuhn, Gehyl gur
YBEQ ungu qryvirerq vagb bhe unaqf nyy gur ynaq; sbe rira nyy gur
vaunovgnagf bs gur pbhagel qb snvag orpnhfr bs hf.

3:1 Naq Wbfuhn ebfr rneyl va gur zbeavat; naq gurl erzbirq sebz
Fuvggvz, naq pnzr gb Wbeqna, ur naq nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq
ybqtrq gurer orsber gurl cnffrq bire.

3:2 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre guerr qnlf, gung gur bssvpref jrag
guebhtu gur ubfg; 3:3 Naq gurl pbzznaqrq gur crbcyr, fnlvat, Jura lr
frr gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, naq gur cevrfgf gur
Yrivgrf ornevat vg, gura lr funyy erzbir sebz lbhe cynpr, naq tb nsgre
vg.

3:4 Lrg gurer funyy or n fcnpr orgjrra lbh naq vg, nobhg gjb gubhfnaq
phovgf ol zrnfher: pbzr abg arne hagb vg, gung lr znl xabj gur jnl ol
juvpu lr zhfg tb: sbe lr unir abg cnffrq guvf jnl urergbsber.

3:5 Naq Wbfuhn fnvq hagb gur crbcyr, Fnapgvsl lbhefryirf: sbe gb
zbeebj gur YBEQ jvyy qb jbaqref nzbat lbh.

3:6 Naq Wbfuhn fcnxr hagb gur cevrfgf, fnlvat, Gnxr hc gur nex bs gur
pbiranag, naq cnff bire orsber gur crbcyr. Naq gurl gbbx hc gur nex bs
gur pbiranag, naq jrag orsber gur crbcyr.

3:7 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Wbfuhn, Guvf qnl jvyy V ortva gb zntavsl
gurr va gur fvtug bs nyy Vfenry, gung gurl znl xabj gung, nf V jnf
jvgu Zbfrf, fb V jvyy or jvgu gurr.

3:8 Naq gubh funyg pbzznaq gur cevrfgf gung orne gur nex bs gur
pbiranag, fnlvat, Jura lr ner pbzr gb gur oevax bs gur jngre bs
Wbeqna, lr funyy fgnaq fgvyy va Wbeqna.

3:9 Naq Wbfuhn fnvq hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, Pbzr uvgure, naq urne
gur jbeqf bs gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

3:10 Naq Wbfuhn fnvq, Urerol lr funyy xabj gung gur yvivat Tbq vf
nzbat lbh, naq gung ur jvyy jvgubhg snvy qevir bhg sebz orsber lbh gur
Pnannavgrf, naq gur Uvggvgrf, naq gur Uvivgrf, naq gur Crevmmvgrf, naq
gur Tvetnfuvgrf, naq gur Nzbevgrf, naq gur Wrohfvgrf.

3:11 Orubyq, gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ bs nyy gur rnegu
cnffrgu bire orsber lbh vagb Wbeqna.

3:12 Abj gurersber gnxr lbh gjryir zra bhg bs gur gevorf bs Vfenry,
bhg bs rirel gevor n zna.

3:13 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, nf fbba nf gur fbyrf bs gur srrg bs
gur cevrfgf gung orne gur nex bs gur YBEQ, gur YBEQ bs nyy gur rnegu,
funyy erfg va gur jngref bs Wbeqna, gung gur jngref bs Wbeqna funyy or
phg bss sebz gur jngref gung pbzr qbja sebz nobir; naq gurl funyy
fgnaq hcba na urnc.

3:14 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur crbcyr erzbirq sebz gurve gragf, gb
cnff bire Wbeqna, naq gur cevrfgf ornevat gur nex bs gur pbiranag
orsber gur crbcyr; 3:15 Naq nf gurl gung oner gur nex jrer pbzr hagb
Wbeqna, naq gur srrg bs gur cevrfgf gung oner gur nex jrer qvccrq va
gur oevz bs gur jngre, (sbe Wbeqna biresybjrgu nyy uvf onaxf nyy gur
gvzr bs uneirfg,) 3:16 Gung gur jngref juvpu pnzr qbja sebz nobir
fgbbq naq ebfr hc hcba na urnc irel sne sebz gur pvgl Nqnz, gung vf
orfvqr Mnergna: naq gubfr gung pnzr qbja gbjneq gur frn bs gur cynva,
rira gur fnyg frn, snvyrq, naq jrer phg bss: naq gur crbcyr cnffrq
bire evtug ntnvafg Wrevpub.

3:17 Naq gur cevrfgf gung oner gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ
fgbbq svez ba qel tebhaq va gur zvqfg bs Wbeqna, naq nyy gur
Vfenryvgrf cnffrq bire ba qel tebhaq, hagvy nyy gur crbcyr jrer cnffrq
pyrna bire Wbeqna.

4:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura nyy gur crbcyr jrer pyrna cnffrq bire
Wbeqna, gung gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Wbfuhn, fnlvat, 4:2 Gnxr lbh gjryir
zra bhg bs gur crbcyr, bhg bs rirel gevor n zna, 4:3 Naq pbzznaq lr
gurz, fnlvat, Gnxr lbh urapr bhg bs gur zvqfg bs Wbeqna, bhg bs gur
cynpr jurer gur cevrfgf' srrg fgbbq svez, gjryir fgbarf, naq lr funyy
pneel gurz bire jvgu lbh, naq yrnir gurz va gur ybqtvat cynpr, jurer
lr funyy ybqtr guvf avtug.

4:4 Gura Wbfuhn pnyyrq gur gjryir zra, jubz ur unq cercnerq bs gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, bhg bs rirel gevor n zna: 4:5 Naq Wbfuhn fnvq hagb
gurz, Cnff bire orsber gur nex bs gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq vagb gur zvqfg bs
Wbeqna, naq gnxr lbh hc rirel zna bs lbh n fgbar hcba uvf fubhyqre,
nppbeqvat hagb gur ahzore bs gur gevorf bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry: 4:6
Gung guvf znl or n fvta nzbat lbh, gung jura lbhe puvyqera nfx gurve
snguref va gvzr gb pbzr, fnlvat, Jung zrna lr ol gurfr fgbarf?  4:7
Gura lr funyy nafjre gurz, Gung gur jngref bs Wbeqna jrer phg bss
orsber gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ; jura vg cnffrq bire
Wbeqna, gur jngref bs Wbeqna jrer phg bss: naq gurfr fgbarf funyy or
sbe n zrzbevny hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry sbe rire.

4:8 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq fb nf Wbfuhn pbzznaqrq, naq gbbx hc
gjryir fgbarf bhg bs gur zvqfg bs Wbeqna, nf gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb
Wbfuhn, nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs gur gevorf bs gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, naq pneevrq gurz bire jvgu gurz hagb gur cynpr jurer gurl
ybqtrq, naq ynvq gurz qbja gurer.

4:9 Naq Wbfuhn frg hc gjryir fgbarf va gur zvqfg bs Wbeqna, va gur
cynpr jurer gur srrg bs gur cevrfgf juvpu oner gur nex bs gur pbiranag
fgbbq: naq gurl ner gurer hagb guvf qnl.

4:10 Sbe gur cevrfgf juvpu oner gur nex fgbbq va gur zvqfg bs Wbeqna,
hagvy rirelguvat jnf svavfurq gung gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Wbfuhn gb fcrnx
hagb gur crbcyr, nppbeqvat gb nyy gung Zbfrf pbzznaqrq Wbfuhn: naq gur
crbcyr unfgrq naq cnffrq bire.

4:11 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura nyy gur crbcyr jrer pyrna cnffrq bire,
gung gur nex bs gur YBEQ cnffrq bire, naq gur cevrfgf, va gur cerfrapr
bs gur crbcyr.

4:12 Naq gur puvyqera bs Erhora, naq gur puvyqera bs Tnq, naq unys gur
gevor bs Znanffru, cnffrq bire nezrq orsber gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, nf
Zbfrf fcnxr hagb gurz: 4:13 Nobhg sbegl gubhfnaq cercnerq sbe jne
cnffrq bire orsber gur YBEQ hagb onggyr, gb gur cynvaf bs Wrevpub.

4:14 Ba gung qnl gur YBEQ zntavsvrq Wbfuhn va gur fvtug bs nyy Vfenry;
naq gurl srnerq uvz, nf gurl srnerq Zbfrf, nyy gur qnlf bs uvf yvsr.

4:15 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Wbfuhn, fnlvat, 4:16 Pbzznaq gur cevrfgf
gung orne gur nex bs gur grfgvzbal, gung gurl pbzr hc bhg bs Wbeqna.

4:17 Wbfuhn gurersber pbzznaqrq gur cevrfgf, fnlvat, Pbzr lr hc bhg bs
Wbeqna.

4:18 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur cevrfgf gung oner gur nex bs gur
pbiranag bs gur YBEQ jrer pbzr hc bhg bs gur zvqfg bs Wbeqna, naq gur
fbyrf bs gur cevrfgf' srrg jrer yvsgrq hc hagb gur qel ynaq, gung gur
jngref bs Wbeqna erghearq hagb gurve cynpr, naq sybjrq bire nyy uvf
onaxf, nf gurl qvq orsber.

4:19 Naq gur crbcyr pnzr hc bhg bs Wbeqna ba gur gragu qnl bs gur
svefg zbagu, naq rapnzcrq va Tvytny, va gur rnfg obeqre bs Wrevpub.

4:20 Naq gubfr gjryir fgbarf, juvpu gurl gbbx bhg bs Wbeqna, qvq
Wbfuhn cvgpu va Tvytny.

4:21 Naq ur fcnxr hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Jura lbhe
puvyqera funyy nfx gurve snguref va gvzr gb pbzr, fnlvat, Jung zrna
gurfr fgbarf?  4:22 Gura lr funyy yrg lbhe puvyqera xabj, fnlvat,
Vfenry pnzr bire guvf Wbeqna ba qel ynaq.

4:23 Sbe gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq qevrq hc gur jngref bs Wbeqna sebz orsber
lbh, hagvy lr jrer cnffrq bire, nf gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq qvq gb gur Erq
frn, juvpu ur qevrq hc sebz orsber hf, hagvy jr jrer tbar bire: 4:24
Gung nyy gur crbcyr bs gur rnegu zvtug xabj gur unaq bs gur YBEQ, gung
vg vf zvtugl: gung lr zvtug srne gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq sbe rire.

5:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura nyy gur xvatf bs gur Nzbevgrf, juvpu
jrer ba gur fvqr bs Wbeqna jrfgjneq, naq nyy gur xvatf bs gur
Pnannavgrf, juvpu jrer ol gur frn, urneq gung gur YBEQ unq qevrq hc
gur jngref bs Wbeqna sebz orsber gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, hagvy jr jrer
cnffrq bire, gung gurve urneg zrygrq, arvgure jnf gurer fcvevg va gurz
nal zber, orpnhfr bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

5:2 Ng gung gvzr gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Wbfuhn, Znxr gurr funec xavirf,
naq pvephzpvfr ntnva gur puvyqera bs Vfenry gur frpbaq gvzr.

5:3 Naq Wbfuhn znqr uvz funec xavirf, naq pvephzpvfrq gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry ng gur uvyy bs gur sberfxvaf.

5:4 Naq guvf vf gur pnhfr jul Wbfuhn qvq pvephzpvfr: Nyy gur crbcyr
gung pnzr bhg bs Rtlcg, gung jrer znyrf, rira nyy gur zra bs jne, qvrq
va gur jvyqrearff ol gur jnl, nsgre gurl pnzr bhg bs Rtlcg.

5:5 Abj nyy gur crbcyr gung pnzr bhg jrer pvephzpvfrq: ohg nyy gur
crbcyr gung jrer obea va gur jvyqrearff ol gur jnl nf gurl pnzr sbegu
bhg bs Rtlcg, gurz gurl unq abg pvephzpvfrq.

5:6 Sbe gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jnyxrq sbegl lrnef va gur jvyqrearff,
gvyy nyy gur crbcyr gung jrer zra bs jne, juvpu pnzr bhg bs Rtlcg,
jrer pbafhzrq, orpnhfr gurl borlrq abg gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ: hagb
jubz gur YBEQ fjner gung ur jbhyq abg furj gurz gur ynaq, juvpu gur
YBEQ fjner hagb gurve snguref gung ur jbhyq tvir hf, n ynaq gung
sybjrgu jvgu zvyx naq ubarl.

5:7 Naq gurve puvyqera, jubz ur envfrq hc va gurve fgrnq, gurz Wbfuhn
pvephzpvfrq: sbe gurl jrer hapvephzpvfrq, orpnhfr gurl unq abg
pvephzpvfrq gurz ol gur jnl.

5:8 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gurl unq qbar pvephzpvfvat nyy gur
crbcyr, gung gurl nobqr va gurve cynprf va gur pnzc, gvyy gurl jrer
jubyr.

5:9 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Wbfuhn, Guvf qnl unir V ebyyrq njnl gur
ercebnpu bs Rtlcg sebz bss lbh. Jurersber gur anzr bs gur cynpr vf
pnyyrq Tvytny hagb guvf qnl.

5:10 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry rapnzcrq va Tvytny, naq xrcg gur
cnffbire ba gur sbhegrragu qnl bs gur zbagu ng rira va gur cynvaf bs
Wrevpub.

5:11 Naq gurl qvq rng bs gur byq pbea bs gur ynaq ba gur zbeebj nsgre
gur cnffbire, hayrnirarq pnxrf, naq cnepurq pbea va gur frysfnzr qnl.

5:12 Naq gur znaan prnfrq ba gur zbeebj nsgre gurl unq rngra bs gur
byq pbea bs gur ynaq; arvgure unq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry znaan nal
zber; ohg gurl qvq rng bs gur sehvg bs gur ynaq bs Pnanna gung lrne.

5:13 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Wbfuhn jnf ol Wrevpub, gung ur yvsgrq
hc uvf rlrf naq ybbxrq, naq, orubyq, gurer fgbbq n zna bire ntnvafg
uvz jvgu uvf fjbeq qenja va uvf unaq: naq Wbfuhn jrag hagb uvz, naq
fnvq hagb uvz, Neg gubh sbe hf, be sbe bhe nqirefnevrf?  5:14 Naq ur
fnvq, Anl; ohg nf pncgnva bs gur ubfg bs gur YBEQ nz V abj pbzr. Naq
Wbfuhn sryy ba uvf snpr gb gur rnegu, naq qvq jbefuvc, naq fnvq hagb
uvz, Jung fnvgu zl Ybeq hagb uvf freinag?  5:15 Naq gur pncgnva bs gur
YBEQ'f ubfg fnvq hagb Wbfuhn, Ybbfr gul fubr sebz bss gul sbbg; sbe
gur cynpr jurerba gubh fgnaqrfg vf ubyl. Naq Wbfuhn qvq fb.

6:1 Abj Wrevpub jnf fgenvgyl fuhg hc orpnhfr bs gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry: abar jrag bhg, naq abar pnzr va.

6:2 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Wbfuhn, Frr, V unir tvira vagb guvar unaq
Wrevpub, naq gur xvat gurerbs, naq gur zvtugl zra bs inybhe.

6:3 Naq lr funyy pbzcnff gur pvgl, nyy lr zra bs jne, naq tb ebhaq
nobhg gur pvgl bapr. Guhf funyg gubh qb fvk qnlf.

6:4 Naq frira cevrfgf funyy orne orsber gur nex frira gehzcrgf bs
enzf' ubeaf: naq gur friragu qnl lr funyy pbzcnff gur pvgl frira
gvzrf, naq gur cevrfgf funyy oybj jvgu gur gehzcrgf.

6:5 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, gung jura gurl znxr n ybat oynfg jvgu
gur enz'f ubea, naq jura lr urne gur fbhaq bs gur gehzcrg, nyy gur
crbcyr funyy fubhg jvgu n terng fubhg; naq gur jnyy bs gur pvgl funyy
snyy qbja syng, naq gur crbcyr funyy nfpraq hc rirel zna fgenvtug
orsber uvz.

6:6 Naq Wbfuhn gur fba bs Aha pnyyrq gur cevrfgf, naq fnvq hagb gurz,
Gnxr hc gur nex bs gur pbiranag, naq yrg frira cevrfgf orne frira
gehzcrgf bs enzf' ubeaf orsber gur nex bs gur YBEQ.

6:7 Naq ur fnvq hagb gur crbcyr, Cnff ba, naq pbzcnff gur pvgl, naq
yrg uvz gung vf nezrq cnff ba orsber gur nex bs gur YBEQ.

6:8 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Wbfuhn unq fcbxra hagb gur crbcyr, gung
gur frira cevrfgf ornevat gur frira gehzcrgf bs enzf' ubeaf cnffrq ba
orsber gur YBEQ, naq oyrj jvgu gur gehzcrgf: naq gur nex bs gur
pbiranag bs gur YBEQ sbyybjrq gurz.

6:9 Naq gur nezrq zra jrag orsber gur cevrfgf gung oyrj jvgu gur
gehzcrgf, naq gur ererjneq pnzr nsgre gur nex, gur cevrfgf tbvat ba,
naq oybjvat jvgu gur gehzcrgf.

6:10 Naq Wbfuhn unq pbzznaqrq gur crbcyr, fnlvat, Lr funyy abg fubhg,
abe znxr nal abvfr jvgu lbhe ibvpr, arvgure funyy nal jbeq cebprrq bhg
bs lbhe zbhgu, hagvy gur qnl V ovq lbh fubhg; gura funyy lr fubhg.

6:11 Fb gur nex bs gur YBEQ pbzcnffrq gur pvgl, tbvat nobhg vg bapr:
naq gurl pnzr vagb gur pnzc, naq ybqtrq va gur pnzc.

6:12 Naq Wbfuhn ebfr rneyl va gur zbeavat, naq gur cevrfgf gbbx hc gur
nex bs gur YBEQ.

6:13 Naq frira cevrfgf ornevat frira gehzcrgf bs enzf' ubeaf orsber
gur nex bs gur YBEQ jrag ba pbagvahnyyl, naq oyrj jvgu gur gehzcrgf:
naq gur nezrq zra jrag orsber gurz; ohg gur ererjneq pnzr nsgre gur
nex bs gur YBEQ, gur cevrfgf tbvat ba, naq oybjvat jvgu gur gehzcrgf.

6:14 Naq gur frpbaq qnl gurl pbzcnffrq gur pvgl bapr, naq erghearq
vagb gur pnzc: fb gurl qvq fvk qnlf.

6:15 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ba gur friragu qnl, gung gurl ebfr rneyl
nobhg gur qnjavat bs gur qnl, naq pbzcnffrq gur pvgl nsgre gur fnzr
znaare frira gvzrf: bayl ba gung qnl gurl pbzcnffrq gur pvgl frira
gvzrf.

6:16 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng gur friragu gvzr, jura gur cevrfgf oyrj
jvgu gur gehzcrgf, Wbfuhn fnvq hagb gur crbcyr, Fubhg; sbe gur YBEQ
ungu tvira lbh gur pvgl.

6:17 Naq gur pvgl funyy or npphefrq, rira vg, naq nyy gung ner
gurerva, gb gur YBEQ: bayl Enuno gur uneybg funyy yvir, fur naq nyy
gung ner jvgu ure va gur ubhfr, orpnhfr fur uvq gur zrffratref gung jr
frag.

6:18 Naq lr, va nal jvfr xrrc lbhefryirf sebz gur npphefrq guvat, yrfg
lr znxr lbhefryirf npphefrq, jura lr gnxr bs gur npphefrq guvat, naq
znxr gur pnzc bs Vfenry n phefr, naq gebhoyr vg.

6:19 Ohg nyy gur fvyire, naq tbyq, naq irffryf bs oenff naq veba, ner
pbafrpengrq hagb gur YBEQ: gurl funyy pbzr vagb gur gernfhel bs gur
YBEQ.

6:20 Fb gur crbcyr fubhgrq jura gur cevrfgf oyrj jvgu gur gehzcrgf:
naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur crbcyr urneq gur fbhaq bs gur gehzcrg,
naq gur crbcyr fubhgrq jvgu n terng fubhg, gung gur jnyy sryy qbja
syng, fb gung gur crbcyr jrag hc vagb gur pvgl, rirel zna fgenvtug
orsber uvz, naq gurl gbbx gur pvgl.

6:21 Naq gurl hggreyl qrfgeblrq nyy gung jnf va gur pvgl, obgu zna naq
jbzna, lbhat naq byq, naq bk, naq furrc, naq nff, jvgu gur rqtr bs gur
fjbeq.

6:22 Ohg Wbfuhn unq fnvq hagb gur gjb zra gung unq fcvrq bhg gur
pbhagel, Tb vagb gur uneybg'f ubhfr, naq oevat bhg gurapr gur jbzna,
naq nyy gung fur ungu, nf lr fjner hagb ure.

6:23 Naq gur lbhat zra gung jrer fcvrf jrag va, naq oebhtug bhg Enuno,
naq ure sngure, naq ure zbgure, naq ure oerguera, naq nyy gung fur
unq; naq gurl oebhtug bhg nyy ure xvaqerq, naq yrsg gurz jvgubhg gur
pnzc bs Vfenry.

6:24 Naq gurl oheag gur pvgl jvgu sver, naq nyy gung jnf gurerva: bayl
gur fvyire, naq gur tbyq, naq gur irffryf bs oenff naq bs veba, gurl
chg vagb gur gernfhel bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

6:25 Naq Wbfuhn fnirq Enuno gur uneybg nyvir, naq ure sngure'f
ubhfrubyq, naq nyy gung fur unq; naq fur qjryyrgu va Vfenry rira hagb
guvf qnl; orpnhfr fur uvq gur zrffratref, juvpu Wbfuhn frag gb fcl bhg
Wrevpub.

6:26 Naq Wbfuhn nqwherq gurz ng gung gvzr, fnlvat, Phefrq or gur zna
orsber gur YBEQ, gung evfrgu hc naq ohvyqrgu guvf pvgl Wrevpub: ur
funyy ynl gur sbhaqngvba gurerbs va uvf svefgobea, naq va uvf lbhatrfg
fba funyy ur frg hc gur tngrf bs vg.

6:27 Fb gur YBEQ jnf jvgu Wbfuhn; naq uvf snzr jnf abvfrq guebhtubhg
nyy gur pbhagel.

7:1 Ohg gur puvyqera bs Vfenry pbzzvggrq n gerfcnff va gur npphefrq
guvat: sbe Npuna, gur fba bs Pnezv, gur fba bs Mnoqv, gur fba bs
Mrenu, bs gur gevor bs Whqnu, gbbx bs gur npphefrq guvat: naq gur
natre bs gur YBEQ jnf xvaqyrq ntnvafg gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

7:2 Naq Wbfuhn frag zra sebz Wrevpub gb Nv, juvpu vf orfvqr Orgunira,
ba gur rnfg bs Orgury, naq fcnxr hagb gurz, fnlvat, Tb hc naq ivrj gur
pbhagel.

Naq gur zra jrag hc naq ivrjrq Nv.

7:3 Naq gurl erghearq gb Wbfuhn, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Yrg abg nyy gur
crbcyr tb hc; ohg yrg nobhg gjb be guerr gubhfnaq zra tb hc naq fzvgr
Nv; naq znxr abg nyy gur crbcyr gb ynobhe guvgure; sbe gurl ner ohg
srj.

7:4 Fb gurer jrag hc guvgure bs gur crbcyr nobhg guerr gubhfnaq zra:
naq gurl syrq orsber gur zra bs Nv.

7:5 Naq gur zra bs Nv fzbgr bs gurz nobhg guvegl naq fvk zra: sbe gurl
punfrq gurz sebz orsber gur tngr rira hagb Furonevz, naq fzbgr gurz va
gur tbvat qbja: jurersber gur urnegf bs gur crbcyr zrygrq, naq orpnzr
nf jngre.

7:6 Naq Wbfuhn erag uvf pybgurf, naq sryy gb gur rnegu hcba uvf snpr
orsber gur nex bs gur YBEQ hagvy gur riragvqr, ur naq gur ryqref bs
Vfenry, naq chg qhfg hcba gurve urnqf.

7:7 Naq Wbfuhn fnvq, Nynf, B YBEQ Tbq, jurersber unfg gubh ng nyy
oebhtug guvf crbcyr bire Wbeqna, gb qryvire hf vagb gur unaq bs gur
Nzbevgrf, gb qrfgebl hf? jbhyq gb Tbq jr unq orra pbagrag, naq qjryg
ba gur bgure fvqr Wbeqna!  7:8 B YBEQ, jung funyy V fnl, jura Vfenry
gheargu gurve onpxf orsber gurve rarzvrf!  7:9 Sbe gur Pnannavgrf naq
nyy gur vaunovgnagf bs gur ynaq funyy urne bs vg, naq funyy raiveba hf
ebhaq, naq phg bss bhe anzr sebz gur rnegu: naq jung jvyg gubh qb hagb
gul terng anzr?  7:10 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Wbfuhn, Trg gurr hc;
jurersber yvrfg gubh guhf hcba gul snpr?  7:11 Vfenry ungu fvaarq, naq
gurl unir nyfb genafterffrq zl pbiranag juvpu V pbzznaqrq gurz: sbe
gurl unir rira gnxra bs gur npphefrq guvat, naq unir nyfb fgbyra, naq
qvffrzoyrq nyfb, naq gurl unir chg vg rira nzbat gurve bja fghss.

7:12 Gurersber gur puvyqera bs Vfenry pbhyq abg fgnaq orsber gurve
rarzvrf, ohg ghearq gurve onpxf orsber gurve rarzvrf, orpnhfr gurl
jrer npphefrq: arvgure jvyy V or jvgu lbh nal zber, rkprcg lr qrfgebl
gur npphefrq sebz nzbat lbh.

7:13 Hc, fnapgvsl gur crbcyr, naq fnl, Fnapgvsl lbhefryirf ntnvafg gb
zbeebj: sbe guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, Gurer vf na npphefrq
guvat va gur zvqfg bs gurr, B Vfenry: gubh pnafg abg fgnaq orsber
guvar rarzvrf, hagvy lr gnxr njnl gur npphefrq guvat sebz nzbat lbh.

7:14 Va gur zbeavat gurersber lr funyy or oebhtug nppbeqvat gb lbhe
gevorf: naq vg funyy or, gung gur gevor juvpu gur YBEQ gnxrgu funyy
pbzr nppbeqvat gb gur snzvyvrf gurerbs; naq gur snzvyl juvpu gur YBEQ
funyy gnxr funyy pbzr ol ubhfrubyqf; naq gur ubhfrubyq juvpu gur YBEQ
funyy gnxr funyy pbzr zna ol zna.

7:15 Naq vg funyy or, gung ur gung vf gnxra jvgu gur npphefrq guvat
funyy or oheag jvgu sver, ur naq nyy gung ur ungu: orpnhfr ur ungu
genafterffrq gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ, naq orpnhfr ur ungu jebhtug
sbyyl va Vfenry.

7:16 Fb Wbfuhn ebfr hc rneyl va gur zbeavat, naq oebhtug Vfenry ol
gurve gevorf; naq gur gevor bs Whqnu jnf gnxra: 7:17 Naq ur oebhtug
gur snzvyl bs Whqnu; naq ur gbbx gur snzvyl bs gur Mneuvgrf: naq ur
oebhtug gur snzvyl bs gur Mneuvgrf zna ol zna; naq Mnoqv jnf gnxra:
7:18 Naq ur oebhtug uvf ubhfrubyq zna ol zna; naq Npuna, gur fba bs
Pnezv, gur fba bs Mnoqv, gur fba bs Mrenu, bs gur gevor bs Whqnu, jnf
gnxra.

7:19 Naq Wbfuhn fnvq hagb Npuna, Zl fba, tvir, V cenl gurr, tybel gb
gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, naq znxr pbasrffvba hagb uvz; naq gryy zr abj
jung gubh unfg qbar; uvqr vg abg sebz zr.

7:20 Naq Npuna nafjrerq Wbfuhn, naq fnvq, Vaqrrq V unir fvaarq ntnvafg
gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, naq guhf naq guhf unir V qbar: 7:21 Jura V fnj
nzbat gur fcbvyf n tbbqyl Onolybavfu tnezrag, naq gjb uhaqerq furxryf
bs fvyire, naq n jrqtr bs tbyq bs svsgl furxryf jrvtug, gura V pbirgrq
gurz, naq gbbx gurz; naq, orubyq, gurl ner uvq va gur rnegu va gur
zvqfg bs zl grag, naq gur fvyire haqre vg.

7:22 Fb Wbfuhn frag zrffratref, naq gurl ena hagb gur grag; naq,
orubyq, vg jnf uvq va uvf grag, naq gur fvyire haqre vg.

7:23 Naq gurl gbbx gurz bhg bs gur zvqfg bs gur grag, naq oebhtug gurz
hagb Wbfuhn, naq hagb nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq ynvq gurz bhg
orsber gur YBEQ.

7:24 Naq Wbfuhn, naq nyy Vfenry jvgu uvz, gbbx Npuna gur fba bs Mrenu,
naq gur fvyire, naq gur tnezrag, naq gur jrqtr bs tbyq, naq uvf fbaf,
naq uvf qnhtugref, naq uvf bkra, naq uvf nffrf, naq uvf furrc, naq uvf
grag, naq nyy gung ur unq: naq gurl oebhtug gurz hagb gur inyyrl bs
Npube.

7:25 Naq Wbfuhn fnvq, Jul unfg gubh gebhoyrq hf? gur YBEQ funyy
gebhoyr gurr guvf qnl. Naq nyy Vfenry fgbarq uvz jvgu fgbarf, naq
ohearq gurz jvgu sver, nsgre gurl unq fgbarq gurz jvgu fgbarf.

7:26 Naq gurl envfrq bire uvz n terng urnc bs fgbarf hagb guvf qnl. Fb
gur YBEQ ghearq sebz gur svreprarff bs uvf natre. Jurersber gur anzr
bs gung cynpr jnf pnyyrq, Gur inyyrl bs Npube, hagb guvf qnl.

8:1 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Wbfuhn, Srne abg, arvgure or gubh qvfznlrq:
gnxr nyy gur crbcyr bs jne jvgu gurr, naq nevfr, tb hc gb Nv: frr, V
unir tvira vagb gul unaq gur xvat bs Nv, naq uvf crbcyr, naq uvf pvgl,
naq uvf ynaq: 8:2 Naq gubh funyg qb gb Nv naq ure xvat nf gubh qvqfg
hagb Wrevpub naq ure xvat: bayl gur fcbvy gurerbs, naq gur pnggyr
gurerbs, funyy lr gnxr sbe n cerl hagb lbhefryirf: ynl gurr na nzohfu
sbe gur pvgl oruvaq vg.

8:3 Fb Wbfuhn nebfr, naq nyy gur crbcyr bs jne, gb tb hc ntnvafg Nv:
naq Wbfuhn pubfr bhg guvegl gubhfnaq zvtugl zra bs inybhe, naq frag
gurz njnl ol avtug.

8:4 Naq ur pbzznaqrq gurz, fnlvat, Orubyq, lr funyy yvr va jnvg
ntnvafg gur pvgl, rira oruvaq gur pvgl: tb abg irel sne sebz gur pvgl,
ohg or lr nyy ernql: 8:5 Naq V, naq nyy gur crbcyr gung ner jvgu zr,
jvyy nccebnpu hagb gur pvgl: naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, jura gurl pbzr
bhg ntnvafg hf, nf ng gur svefg, gung jr jvyy syrr orsber gurz, 8:6
(Sbe gurl jvyy pbzr bhg nsgre hf) gvyy jr unir qenja gurz sebz gur
pvgl; sbe gurl jvyy fnl, Gurl syrr orsber hf, nf ng gur svefg:
gurersber jr jvyy syrr orsber gurz.

8:7 Gura lr funyy evfr hc sebz gur nzohfu, naq frvmr hcba gur pvgl:
sbe gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq jvyy qryvire vg vagb lbhe unaq.

8:8 Naq vg funyy or, jura lr unir gnxra gur pvgl, gung lr funyy frg
gur pvgl ba sver: nppbeqvat gb gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ funyy lr
qb. Frr, V unir pbzznaqrq lbh.

8:9 Wbfuhn gurersber frag gurz sbegu: naq gurl jrag gb yvr va nzohfu,
naq nobqr orgjrra Orgury naq Nv, ba gur jrfg fvqr bs Nv: ohg Wbfuhn
ybqtrq gung avtug nzbat gur crbcyr.

8:10 Naq Wbfuhn ebfr hc rneyl va gur zbeavat, naq ahzorerq gur crbcyr,
naq jrag hc, ur naq gur ryqref bs Vfenry, orsber gur crbcyr gb Nv.

8:11 Naq nyy gur crbcyr, rira gur crbcyr bs jne gung jrer jvgu uvz,
jrag hc, naq qerj avtu, naq pnzr orsber gur pvgl, naq cvgpurq ba gur
abegu fvqr bs Nv: abj gurer jnf n inyyrl orgjrra gurz naq Nv.

8:12 Naq ur gbbx nobhg svir gubhfnaq zra, naq frg gurz gb yvr va
nzohfu orgjrra Orgury naq Nv, ba gur jrfg fvqr bs gur pvgl.

8:13 Naq jura gurl unq frg gur crbcyr, rira nyy gur ubfg gung jnf ba
gur abegu bs gur pvgl, naq gurve yvref va jnvg ba gur jrfg bs gur
pvgl, Wbfuhn jrag gung avtug vagb gur zvqfg bs gur inyyrl.

8:14 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur xvat bs Nv fnj vg, gung gurl unfgrq
naq ebfr hc rneyl, naq gur zra bs gur pvgl jrag bhg ntnvafg Vfenry gb
onggyr, ur naq nyy uvf crbcyr, ng n gvzr nccbvagrq, orsber gur cynva;
ohg ur jvfg abg gung gurer jrer yvref va nzohfu ntnvafg uvz oruvaq gur
pvgl.

8:15 Naq Wbfuhn naq nyy Vfenry znqr nf vs gurl jrer orngra orsber
gurz, naq syrq ol gur jnl bs gur jvyqrearff.

8:16 Naq nyy gur crbcyr gung jrer va Nv jrer pnyyrq gbtrgure gb chefhr
nsgre gurz: naq gurl chefhrq nsgre Wbfuhn, naq jrer qenja njnl sebz
gur pvgl.

8:17 Naq gurer jnf abg n zna yrsg va Nv be Orgury, gung jrag abg bhg
nsgre Vfenry: naq gurl yrsg gur pvgl bcra, naq chefhrq nsgre Vfenry.

8:18 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Wbfuhn, Fgergpu bhg gur fcrne gung vf va
gul unaq gbjneq Nv; sbe V jvyy tvir vg vagb guvar unaq. Naq Wbfuhn
fgergpurq bhg gur fcrne gung ur unq va uvf unaq gbjneq gur pvgl.

8:19 Naq gur nzohfu nebfr dhvpxyl bhg bs gurve cynpr, naq gurl ena nf
fbba nf ur unq fgergpurq bhg uvf unaq: naq gurl ragrerq vagb gur pvgl,
naq gbbx vg, naq unfgrq naq frg gur pvgl ba sver.

8:20 Naq jura gur zra bs Nv ybbxrq oruvaq gurz, gurl fnj, naq, orubyq,
gur fzbxr bs gur pvgl nfpraqrq hc gb urnira, naq gurl unq ab cbjre gb
syrr guvf jnl be gung jnl: naq gur crbcyr gung syrq gb gur jvyqrearff
ghearq onpx hcba gur chefhref.

8:21 Naq jura Wbfuhn naq nyy Vfenry fnj gung gur nzohfu unq gnxra gur
pvgl, naq gung gur fzbxr bs gur pvgl nfpraqrq, gura gurl ghearq ntnva,
naq fyrj gur zra bs Nv.

8:22 Naq gur bgure vffhrq bhg bs gur pvgl ntnvafg gurz; fb gurl jrer
va gur zvqfg bs Vfenry, fbzr ba guvf fvqr, naq fbzr ba gung fvqr: naq
gurl fzbgr gurz, fb gung gurl yrg abar bs gurz erznva be rfpncr.

8:23 Naq gur xvat bs Nv gurl gbbx nyvir, naq oebhtug uvz gb Wbfuhn.

8:24 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Vfenry unq znqr na raq bs fynlvat nyy
gur vaunovgnagf bs Nv va gur svryq, va gur jvyqrearff jurerva gurl
punfrq gurz, naq jura gurl jrer nyy snyyra ba gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq,
hagvy gurl jrer pbafhzrq, gung nyy gur Vfenryvgrf erghearq hagb Nv,
naq fzbgr vg jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq.

8:25 Naq fb vg jnf, gung nyy gung sryy gung qnl, obgu bs zra naq
jbzra, jrer gjryir gubhfnaq, rira nyy gur zra bs Nv.

8:26 Sbe Wbfuhn qerj abg uvf unaq onpx, jurerjvgu ur fgergpurq bhg gur
fcrne, hagvy ur unq hggreyl qrfgeblrq nyy gur vaunovgnagf bs Nv.

8:27 Bayl gur pnggyr naq gur fcbvy bs gung pvgl Vfenry gbbx sbe n cerl
hagb gurzfryirf, nppbeqvat hagb gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ juvpu ur
pbzznaqrq Wbfuhn.

8:28 Naq Wbfuhn oheag Nv, naq znqr vg na urnc sbe rire, rira n
qrfbyngvba hagb guvf qnl.

8:29 Naq gur xvat bs Nv ur unatrq ba n gerr hagvy riragvqr: naq nf
fbba nf gur fha jnf qbja, Wbfuhn pbzznaqrq gung gurl fubhyq gnxr uvf
pnepnfr qbja sebz gur gerr, naq pnfg vg ng gur ragrevat bs gur tngr bs
gur pvgl, naq envfr gurerba n terng urnc bs fgbarf, gung erznvargu
hagb guvf qnl.

8:30 Gura Wbfuhn ohvyg na nygne hagb gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry va zbhag
Rony, 8:31 Nf Zbfrf gur freinag bs gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, nf vg vf jevggra va gur obbx bs gur ynj bs Zbfrf, na nygne bs
jubyr fgbarf, bire juvpu ab zna ungu yvsg hc nal veba: naq gurl
bssrerq gurerba oheag bssrevatf hagb gur YBEQ, naq fnpevsvprq crnpr
bssrevatf.

8:32 Naq ur jebgr gurer hcba gur fgbarf n pbcl bs gur ynj bs Zbfrf,
juvpu ur jebgr va gur cerfrapr bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

8:33 Naq nyy Vfenry, naq gurve ryqref, naq bssvpref, naq gurve whqtrf,
fgbbq ba guvf fvqr gur nex naq ba gung fvqr orsber gur cevrfgf gur
Yrivgrf, juvpu oner gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ, nf jryy gur
fgenatre, nf ur gung jnf obea nzbat gurz; unys bs gurz bire ntnvafg
zbhag Trevmvz, naq unys bs gurz bire ntnvafg zbhag Rony; nf Zbfrf gur
freinag bs gur YBEQ unq pbzznaqrq orsber, gung gurl fubhyq oyrff gur
crbcyr bs Vfenry.

8:34 Naq nsgrejneq ur ernq nyy gur jbeqf bs gur ynj, gur oyrffvatf naq
phefvatf, nppbeqvat gb nyy gung vf jevggra va gur obbx bs gur ynj.

8:35 Gurer jnf abg n jbeq bs nyy gung Zbfrf pbzznaqrq, juvpu Wbfuhn
ernq abg orsber nyy gur pbatertngvba bs Vfenry, jvgu gur jbzra, naq
gur yvggyr barf, naq gur fgenatref gung jrer pbairefnag nzbat gurz.

9:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura nyy gur xvatf juvpu jrer ba guvf fvqr
Wbeqna, va gur uvyyf, naq va gur inyyrlf, naq va nyy gur pbnfgf bs gur
terng frn bire ntnvafg Yronaba, gur Uvggvgr, naq gur Nzbevgr, gur
Pnannavgr, gur Crevmmvgr, gur Uvivgr, naq gur Wrohfvgr, urneq gurerbs;
9:2 Gung gurl tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure, gb svtug jvgu Wbfuhn naq
jvgu Vfenry, jvgu bar nppbeq.

9:3 Naq jura gur vaunovgnagf bs Tvorba urneq jung Wbfuhn unq qbar hagb
Wrevpub naq gb Nv, 9:4 Gurl qvq jbex jvyvyl, naq jrag naq znqr nf vs
gurl unq orra nzonffnqbef, naq gbbx byq fnpxf hcba gurve nffrf, naq
jvar obggyrf, byq, naq erag, naq obhaq hc; 9:5 Naq byq fubrf naq
pybhgrq hcba gurve srrg, naq byq tnezragf hcba gurz; naq nyy gur oernq
bs gurve cebivfvba jnf qel naq zbhyql.

9:6 Naq gurl jrag gb Wbfuhn hagb gur pnzc ng Tvytny, naq fnvq hagb
uvz, naq gb gur zra bs Vfenry, Jr or pbzr sebz n sne pbhagel: abj
gurersber znxr lr n yrnthr jvgu hf.

9:7 Naq gur zra bs Vfenry fnvq hagb gur Uvivgrf, Crenqiragher lr qjryy
nzbat hf; naq ubj funyy jr znxr n yrnthr jvgu lbh?  9:8 Naq gurl fnvq
hagb Wbfuhn, Jr ner gul freinagf. Naq Wbfuhn fnvq hagb gurz, Jub ner
lr? naq sebz jurapr pbzr lr?  9:9 Naq gurl fnvq hagb uvz, Sebz n irel
sne pbhagel gul freinagf ner pbzr orpnhfr bs gur anzr bs gur YBEQ gul
Tbq: sbe jr unir urneq gur snzr bs uvz, naq nyy gung ur qvq va Rtlcg,
9:10 Naq nyy gung ur qvq gb gur gjb xvatf bs gur Nzbevgrf, gung jrer
orlbaq Wbeqna, gb Fvuba xvat bs Urfuoba, naq gb Bt xvat bs Onfuna,
juvpu jnf ng Nfugnebgu.

9:11 Jurersber bhe ryqref naq nyy gur vaunovgnagf bs bhe pbhagel fcnxr
gb hf, fnlvat, Gnxr ivpghnyf jvgu lbh sbe gur wbhearl, naq tb gb zrrg
gurz, naq fnl hagb gurz, Jr ner lbhe freinagf: gurersber abj znxr lr n
yrnthr jvgu hf.

9:12 Guvf bhe oernq jr gbbx ubg sbe bhe cebivfvba bhg bs bhe ubhfrf ba
gur qnl jr pnzr sbegu gb tb hagb lbh; ohg abj, orubyq, vg vf qel, naq
vg vf zbhyql: 9:13 Naq gurfr obggyrf bs jvar, juvpu jr svyyrq, jrer
arj; naq, orubyq, gurl or erag: naq gurfr bhe tnezragf naq bhe fubrf
ner orpbzr byq ol ernfba bs gur irel ybat wbhearl.

9:14 Naq gur zra gbbx bs gurve ivpghnyf, naq nfxrq abg pbhafry ng gur
zbhgu bs gur YBEQ.

9:15 Naq Wbfuhn znqr crnpr jvgu gurz, naq znqr n yrnthr jvgu gurz, gb
yrg gurz yvir: naq gur cevaprf bs gur pbatertngvba fjner hagb gurz.

9:16 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng gur raq bs guerr qnlf nsgre gurl unq znqr
n yrnthr jvgu gurz, gung gurl urneq gung gurl jrer gurve arvtuobhef,
naq gung gurl qjryg nzbat gurz.

9:17 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry wbhearlrq, naq pnzr hagb gurve pvgvrf
ba gur guveq qnl. Abj gurve pvgvrf jrer Tvorba, naq Purcuvenu, naq
Orrebgu, naq Xvewnguwrnevz.

9:18 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry fzbgr gurz abg, orpnhfr gur cevaprf bs
gur pbatertngvba unq fjbea hagb gurz ol gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry. Naq
nyy gur pbatertngvba zhezherq ntnvafg gur cevaprf.

9:19 Ohg nyy gur cevaprf fnvq hagb nyy gur pbatertngvba, Jr unir fjbea
hagb gurz ol gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry: abj gurersber jr znl abg gbhpu
gurz.

9:20 Guvf jr jvyy qb gb gurz; jr jvyy rira yrg gurz yvir, yrfg jengu
or hcba hf, orpnhfr bs gur bngu juvpu jr fjner hagb gurz.

9:21 Naq gur cevaprf fnvq hagb gurz, Yrg gurz yvir; ohg yrg gurz or
urjref bs jbbq naq qenjref bs jngre hagb nyy gur pbatertngvba; nf gur
cevaprf unq cebzvfrq gurz.

9:22 Naq Wbfuhn pnyyrq sbe gurz, naq ur fcnxr hagb gurz, fnlvat,
Jurersber unir lr orthvyrq hf, fnlvat, Jr ner irel sne sebz lbh; jura
lr qjryy nzbat hf?  9:23 Abj gurersber lr ner phefrq, naq gurer funyy
abar bs lbh or serrq sebz orvat obaqzra, naq urjref bs jbbq naq
qenjref bs jngre sbe gur ubhfr bs zl Tbq.

9:24 Naq gurl nafjrerq Wbfuhn, naq fnvq, Orpnhfr vg jnf pregnvayl gbyq
gul freinagf, ubj gung gur YBEQ gul Tbq pbzznaqrq uvf freinag Zbfrf gb
tvir lbh nyy gur ynaq, naq gb qrfgebl nyy gur vaunovgnagf bs gur ynaq
sebz orsber lbh, gurersber jr jrer fber nsenvq bs bhe yvirf orpnhfr bs
lbh, naq unir qbar guvf guvat.

9:25 Naq abj, orubyq, jr ner va guvar unaq: nf vg frrzrgu tbbq naq
evtug hagb gurr gb qb hagb hf, qb.

9:26 Naq fb qvq ur hagb gurz, naq qryvirerq gurz bhg bs gur unaq bs
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, gung gurl fyrj gurz abg.

9:27 Naq Wbfuhn znqr gurz gung qnl urjref bs jbbq naq qenjref bs jngre
sbe gur pbatertngvba, naq sbe gur nygne bs gur YBEQ, rira hagb guvf
qnl, va gur cynpr juvpu ur fubhyq pubbfr.

10:1 Abj vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Nqbavmrqrp xvat bs Wrehfnyrz unq urneq
ubj Wbfuhn unq gnxra Nv, naq unq hggreyl qrfgeblrq vg; nf ur unq qbar
gb Wrevpub naq ure xvat, fb ur unq qbar gb Nv naq ure xvat; naq ubj
gur vaunovgnagf bs Tvorba unq znqr crnpr jvgu Vfenry, naq jrer nzbat
gurz; 10:2 Gung gurl srnerq terngyl, orpnhfr Tvorba jnf n terng pvgl,
nf bar bs gur eblny pvgvrf, naq orpnhfr vg jnf terngre guna Nv, naq
nyy gur zra gurerbs jrer zvtugl.

10:3 Jurersber Nqbavmrqrp xvat bs Wrehfnyrz, frag hagb Ubunz xvat bs
Uroeba, naq hagb Cvenz xvat bs Wnezhgu, naq hagb Wncuvn xvat bs
Ynpuvfu, naq hagb Qrove xvat bs Rtyba, fnlvat, 10:4 Pbzr hc hagb zr,
naq uryc zr, gung jr znl fzvgr Tvorba: sbe vg ungu znqr crnpr jvgu
Wbfuhn naq jvgu gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

10:5 Gurersber gur svir xvatf bs gur Nzbevgrf, gur xvat bs Wrehfnyrz,
gur xvat bs Uroeba, gur xvat bs Wnezhgu, gur xvat bs Ynpuvfu, gur xvat
bs Rtyba, tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure, naq jrag hc, gurl naq nyy
gurve ubfgf, naq rapnzcrq orsber Tvorba, naq znqr jne ntnvafg vg.

10:6 Naq gur zra bs Tvorba frag hagb Wbfuhn gb gur pnzc gb Tvytny,
fnlvat, Fynpx abg gul unaq sebz gul freinagf; pbzr hc gb hf dhvpxyl,
naq fnir hf, naq uryc hf: sbe nyy gur xvatf bs gur Nzbevgrf gung qjryy
va gur zbhagnvaf ner tngurerq gbtrgure ntnvafg hf.

10:7 Fb Wbfuhn nfpraqrq sebz Tvytny, ur, naq nyy gur crbcyr bs jne
jvgu uvz, naq nyy gur zvtugl zra bs inybhe.

10:8 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Wbfuhn, Srne gurz abg: sbe V unir
qryvirerq gurz vagb guvar unaq; gurer funyy abg n zna bs gurz fgnaq
orsber gurr.

10:9 Wbfuhn gurersber pnzr hagb gurz fhqqrayl, naq jrag hc sebz Tvytny
nyy avtug.

10:10 Naq gur YBEQ qvfpbzsvgrq gurz orsber Vfenry, naq fyrj gurz jvgu
n terng fynhtugre ng Tvorba, naq punfrq gurz nybat gur jnl gung tbrgu
hc gb Orguubeba, naq fzbgr gurz gb Nmrxnu, naq hagb Znxxrqnu.

10:11 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf gurl syrq sebz orsber Vfenry, naq jrer
va gur tbvat qbja gb Orguubeba, gung gur YBEQ pnfg qbja terng fgbarf
sebz urnira hcba gurz hagb Nmrxnu, naq gurl qvrq: gurl jrer zber juvpu
qvrq jvgu unvyfgbarf guna gurl jubz gur puvyqera bs Vfenry fyrj jvgu
gur fjbeq.

10:12 Gura fcnxr Wbfuhn gb gur YBEQ va gur qnl jura gur YBEQ qryvirerq
hc gur Nzbevgrf orsber gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq ur fnvq va gur
fvtug bs Vfenry, Fha, fgnaq gubh fgvyy hcba Tvorba; naq gubh, Zbba, va
gur inyyrl bs Nwnyba.

10:13 Naq gur fha fgbbq fgvyy, naq gur zbba fgnlrq, hagvy gur crbcyr
unq niratrq gurzfryirf hcba gurve rarzvrf. Vf abg guvf jevggra va gur
obbx bs Wnfure? Fb gur fha fgbbq fgvyy va gur zvqfg bs urnira, naq
unfgrq abg gb tb qbja nobhg n jubyr qnl.

10:14 Naq gurer jnf ab qnl yvxr gung orsber vg be nsgre vg, gung gur
YBEQ urnexrarq hagb gur ibvpr bs n zna: sbe gur YBEQ sbhtug sbe
Vfenry.

10:15 Naq Wbfuhn erghearq, naq nyy Vfenry jvgu uvz, hagb gur pnzc gb
Tvytny.

10:16 Ohg gurfr svir xvatf syrq, naq uvq gurzfryirf va n pnir ng
Znxxrqnu.

10:17 Naq vg jnf gbyq Wbfuhn, fnlvat, Gur svir xvatf ner sbhaq uvq va
n pnir ng Znxxrqnu.

10:18 Naq Wbfuhn fnvq, Ebyy terng fgbarf hcba gur zbhgu bs gur pnir,
naq frg zra ol vg sbe gb xrrc gurz: 10:19 Naq fgnl lr abg, ohg chefhr
nsgre lbhe rarzvrf, naq fzvgr gur uvaqzbfg bs gurz; fhssre gurz abg gb
ragre vagb gurve pvgvrf: sbe gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq ungu qryvirerq gurz
vagb lbhe unaq.

10:20 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Wbfuhn naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry unq
znqr na raq bs fynlvat gurz jvgu n irel terng fynhtugre, gvyy gurl
jrer pbafhzrq, gung gur erfg juvpu erznvarq bs gurz ragrerq vagb
sraprq pvgvrf.

10:21 Naq nyy gur crbcyr erghearq gb gur pnzc gb Wbfuhn ng Znxxrqnu va
crnpr: abar zbirq uvf gbathr ntnvafg nal bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

10:22 Gura fnvq Wbfuhn, Bcra gur zbhgu bs gur pnir, naq oevat bhg
gubfr svir xvatf hagb zr bhg bs gur pnir.

10:23 Naq gurl qvq fb, naq oebhtug sbegu gubfr svir xvatf hagb uvz bhg
bs gur pnir, gur xvat bs Wrehfnyrz, gur xvat bs Uroeba, gur xvat bs
Wnezhgu, gur xvat bs Ynpuvfu, naq gur xvat bs Rtyba.

10:24 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gurl oebhtug bhg gubfr xvatf hagb
Wbfuhn, gung Wbfuhn pnyyrq sbe nyy gur zra bs Vfenry, naq fnvq hagb
gur pncgnvaf bs gur zra bs jne juvpu jrag jvgu uvz, Pbzr arne, chg
lbhe srrg hcba gur arpxf bs gurfr xvatf. Naq gurl pnzr arne, naq chg
gurve srrg hcba gur arpxf bs gurz.

10:25 Naq Wbfuhn fnvq hagb gurz, Srne abg, abe or qvfznlrq, or fgebat
naq bs tbbq pbhentr: sbe guhf funyy gur YBEQ qb gb nyy lbhe rarzvrf
ntnvafg jubz lr svtug.

10:26 Naq nsgrejneq Wbfuhn fzbgr gurz, naq fyrj gurz, naq unatrq gurz
ba svir gerrf: naq gurl jrer unatvat hcba gur gerrf hagvy gur riravat.

10:27 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng gur gvzr bs gur tbvat qbja bs gur fha,
gung Wbfuhn pbzznaqrq, naq gurl gbbx gurz qbja bss gur gerrf, naq pnfg
gurz vagb gur pnir jurerva gurl unq orra uvq, naq ynvq terng fgbarf va
gur pnir'f zbhgu, juvpu erznva hagvy guvf irel qnl.

10:28 Naq gung qnl Wbfuhn gbbx Znxxrqnu, naq fzbgr vg jvgu gur rqtr bs
gur fjbeq, naq gur xvat gurerbs ur hggreyl qrfgeblrq, gurz, naq nyy
gur fbhyf gung jrer gurerva; ur yrg abar erznva: naq ur qvq gb gur
xvat bs Znxxrqnu nf ur qvq hagb gur xvat bs Wrevpub.

10:29 Gura Wbfuhn cnffrq sebz Znxxrqnu, naq nyy Vfenry jvgu uvz, hagb
Yvoanu, naq sbhtug ntnvafg Yvoanu: 10:30 Naq gur YBEQ qryvirerq vg
nyfb, naq gur xvat gurerbs, vagb gur unaq bs Vfenry; naq ur fzbgr vg
jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq, naq nyy gur fbhyf gung jrer gurerva; ur
yrg abar erznva va vg; ohg qvq hagb gur xvat gurerbs nf ur qvq hagb
gur xvat bs Wrevpub.

10:31 Naq Wbfuhn cnffrq sebz Yvoanu, naq nyy Vfenry jvgu uvz, hagb
Ynpuvfu, naq rapnzcrq ntnvafg vg, naq sbhtug ntnvafg vg: 10:32 Naq gur
YBEQ qryvirerq Ynpuvfu vagb gur unaq bs Vfenry, juvpu gbbx vg ba gur
frpbaq qnl, naq fzbgr vg jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq, naq nyy gur fbhyf
gung jrer gurerva, nppbeqvat gb nyy gung ur unq qbar gb Yvoanu.

10:33 Gura Ubenz xvat bs Trmre pnzr hc gb uryc Ynpuvfu; naq Wbfuhn
fzbgr uvz naq uvf crbcyr, hagvy ur unq yrsg uvz abar erznvavat.

10:34 Naq sebz Ynpuvfu Wbfuhn cnffrq hagb Rtyba, naq nyy Vfenry jvgu
uvz; naq gurl rapnzcrq ntnvafg vg, naq sbhtug ntnvafg vg: 10:35 Naq
gurl gbbx vg ba gung qnl, naq fzbgr vg jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq, naq
nyy gur fbhyf gung jrer gurerva ur hggreyl qrfgeblrq gung qnl,
nppbeqvat gb nyy gung ur unq qbar gb Ynpuvfu.

10:36 Naq Wbfuhn jrag hc sebz Rtyba, naq nyy Vfenry jvgu uvz, hagb
Uroeba; naq gurl sbhtug ntnvafg vg: 10:37 Naq gurl gbbx vg, naq fzbgr
vg jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq, naq gur xvat gurerbs, naq nyy gur
pvgvrf gurerbs, naq nyy gur fbhyf gung jrer gurerva; ur yrsg abar
erznvavat, nppbeqvat gb nyy gung ur unq qbar gb Rtyba; ohg qrfgeblrq
vg hggreyl, naq nyy gur fbhyf gung jrer gurerva.

10:38 Naq Wbfuhn erghearq, naq nyy Vfenry jvgu uvz, gb Qrove; naq
sbhtug ntnvafg vg: 10:39 Naq ur gbbx vg, naq gur xvat gurerbs, naq nyy
gur pvgvrf gurerbs; naq gurl fzbgr gurz jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq,
naq hggreyl qrfgeblrq nyy gur fbhyf gung jrer gurerva; ur yrsg abar
erznvavat: nf ur unq qbar gb Uroeba, fb ur qvq gb Qrove, naq gb gur
xvat gurerbs; nf ur unq qbar nyfb gb Yvoanu, naq gb ure xvat.

10:40 Fb Wbfuhn fzbgr nyy gur pbhagel bs gur uvyyf, naq bs gur fbhgu,
naq bs gur inyr, naq bs gur fcevatf, naq nyy gurve xvatf: ur yrsg abar
erznvavat, ohg hggreyl qrfgeblrq nyy gung oerngurq, nf gur YBEQ Tbq bs
Vfenry pbzznaqrq.

10:41 Naq Wbfuhn fzbgr gurz sebz Xnqrfuonearn rira hagb Tnmn, naq nyy
gur pbhagel bs Tbfura, rira hagb Tvorba.

10:42 Naq nyy gurfr xvatf naq gurve ynaq qvq Wbfuhn gnxr ng bar gvzr,
orpnhfr gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry sbhtug sbe Vfenry.

10:43 Naq Wbfuhn erghearq, naq nyy Vfenry jvgu uvz, hagb gur pnzc gb
Tvytny.

11:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Wnova xvat bs Unmbe unq urneq gubfr
guvatf, gung ur frag gb Wbono xvat bs Znqba, naq gb gur xvat bs
Fuvzeba, naq gb gur xvat bs Npufuncu, 11:2 Naq gb gur xvatf gung jrer
ba gur abegu bs gur zbhagnvaf, naq bs gur cynvaf fbhgu bs Puvaarebgu,
naq va gur inyyrl, naq va gur obeqref bs Qbe ba gur jrfg, 11:3 Naq gb
gur Pnannavgr ba gur rnfg naq ba gur jrfg, naq gb gur Nzbevgr, naq gur
Uvggvgr, naq gur Crevmmvgr, naq gur Wrohfvgr va gur zbhagnvaf, naq gb
gur Uvivgr haqre Urezba va gur ynaq bs Zvmcru.

11:4 Naq gurl jrag bhg, gurl naq nyy gurve ubfgf jvgu gurz, zhpu
crbcyr, rira nf gur fnaq gung vf hcba gur frn fuber va zhygvghqr, jvgu
ubefrf naq punevbgf irel znal.

11:5 Naq jura nyy gurfr xvatf jrer zrg gbtrgure, gurl pnzr naq cvgpurq
gbtrgure ng gur jngref bs Zrebz, gb svtug ntnvafg Vfenry.

11:6 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Wbfuhn, Or abg nsenvq orpnhfr bs gurz: sbe
gb zbeebj nobhg guvf gvzr jvyy V qryvire gurz hc nyy fynva orsber
Vfenry: gubh funyg ubhtu gurve ubefrf, naq ohea gurve punevbgf jvgu
sver.

11:7 Fb Wbfuhn pnzr, naq nyy gur crbcyr bs jne jvgu uvz, ntnvafg gurz
ol gur jngref bs Zrebz fhqqrayl; naq gurl sryy hcba gurz.

11:8 Naq gur YBEQ qryvirerq gurz vagb gur unaq bs Vfenry, jub fzbgr
gurz, naq punfrq gurz hagb terng Mvqba, naq hagb Zvfercubguznvz, naq
hagb gur inyyrl bs Zvmcru rnfgjneq; naq gurl fzbgr gurz, hagvy gurl
yrsg gurz abar erznvavat.

11:9 Naq Wbfuhn qvq hagb gurz nf gur YBEQ onqr uvz: ur ubhturq gurve
ubefrf, naq oheag gurve punevbgf jvgu sver.

11:10 Naq Wbfuhn ng gung gvzr ghearq onpx, naq gbbx Unmbe, naq fzbgr
gur xvat gurerbs jvgu gur fjbeq: sbe Unmbe orsbergvzr jnf gur urnq bs
nyy gubfr xvatqbzf.

11:11 Naq gurl fzbgr nyy gur fbhyf gung jrer gurerva jvgu gur rqtr bs
gur fjbeq, hggreyl qrfgeblvat gurz: gurer jnf abg nal yrsg gb oerngur:
naq ur oheag Unmbe jvgu sver.

11:12 Naq nyy gur pvgvrf bs gubfr xvatf, naq nyy gur xvatf bs gurz,
qvq Wbfuhn gnxr, naq fzbgr gurz jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq, naq ur
hggreyl qrfgeblrq gurz, nf Zbfrf gur freinag bs gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq.

11:13 Ohg nf sbe gur pvgvrf gung fgbbq fgvyy va gurve fgeratgu, Vfenry
ohearq abar bs gurz, fnir Unmbe bayl; gung qvq Wbfuhn ohea.

11:14 Naq nyy gur fcbvy bs gurfr pvgvrf, naq gur pnggyr, gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry gbbx sbe n cerl hagb gurzfryirf; ohg rirel zna gurl fzbgr
jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq, hagvy gurl unq qrfgeblrq gurz, arvgure
yrsg gurl nal gb oerngur.

11:15 Nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf uvf freinag, fb qvq Zbfrf pbzznaq
Wbfuhn, naq fb qvq Wbfuhn; ur yrsg abguvat haqbar bs nyy gung gur YBEQ
pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

11:16 Fb Wbfuhn gbbx nyy gung ynaq, gur uvyyf, naq nyy gur fbhgu
pbhagel, naq nyy gur ynaq bs Tbfura, naq gur inyyrl, naq gur cynva,
naq gur zbhagnva bs Vfenry, naq gur inyyrl bs gur fnzr; 11:17 Rira
sebz gur zbhag Unynx, gung tbrgu hc gb Frve, rira hagb Onnytnq va gur
inyyrl bs Yronaba haqre zbhag Urezba: naq nyy gurve xvatf ur gbbx, naq
fzbgr gurz, naq fyrj gurz.

11:18 Wbfuhn znqr jne n ybat gvzr jvgu nyy gubfr xvatf.

11:19 Gurer jnf abg n pvgl gung znqr crnpr jvgu gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, fnir gur Uvivgrf gur vaunovgnagf bs Tvorba: nyy bgure gurl
gbbx va onggyr.

11:20 Sbe vg jnf bs gur YBEQ gb uneqra gurve urnegf, gung gurl fubhyq
pbzr ntnvafg Vfenry va onggyr, gung ur zvtug qrfgebl gurz hggreyl, naq
gung gurl zvtug unir ab snibhe, ohg gung ur zvtug qrfgebl gurz, nf gur
YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

11:21 Naq ng gung gvzr pnzr Wbfuhn, naq phg bss gur Nanxvzf sebz gur
zbhagnvaf, sebz Uroeba, sebz Qrove, sebz Nano, naq sebz nyy gur
zbhagnvaf bs Whqnu, naq sebz nyy gur zbhagnvaf bs Vfenry: Wbfuhn
qrfgeblrq gurz hggreyl jvgu gurve pvgvrf.

11:22 Gurer jnf abar bs gur Nanxvzf yrsg va gur ynaq bs gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry: bayl va Tnmn, va Tngu, naq va Nfuqbq, gurer erznvarq.

11:23 Fb Wbfuhn gbbx gur jubyr ynaq, nppbeqvat gb nyy gung gur YBEQ
fnvq hagb Zbfrf; naq Wbfuhn tnir vg sbe na vaurevgnapr hagb Vfenry
nppbeqvat gb gurve qvivfvbaf ol gurve gevorf. Naq gur ynaq erfgrq sebz
jne.

12:1 Abj gurfr ner gur xvatf bs gur ynaq, juvpu gur puvyqera bs Vfenry
fzbgr, naq cbffrffrq gurve ynaq ba gur bgure fvqr Wbeqna gbjneq gur
evfvat bs gur fha, sebz gur evire Neaba hagb zbhag Urezba, naq nyy gur
cynva ba gur rnfg: 12:2 Fvuba xvat bs gur Nzbevgrf, jub qjryg va
Urfuoba, naq ehyrq sebz Nebre, juvpu vf hcba gur onax bs gur evire
Neaba, naq sebz gur zvqqyr bs gur evire, naq sebz unys Tvyrnq, rira
hagb gur evire Wnoobx, juvpu vf gur obeqre bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba;
12:3 Naq sebz gur cynva gb gur frn bs Puvaarebgu ba gur rnfg, naq hagb
gur frn bs gur cynva, rira gur fnyg frn ba gur rnfg, gur jnl gb
Orguwrfuvzbgu; naq sebz gur fbhgu, haqre Nfuqbgucvftnu: 12:4 Naq gur
pbnfg bs Bt xvat bs Onfuna, juvpu jnf bs gur erzanag bs gur tvnagf,
gung qjryg ng Nfugnebgu naq ng Rqerv, 12:5 Naq ervtarq va zbhag
Urezba, naq va Fnypnu, naq va nyy Onfuna, hagb gur obeqre bs gur
Trfuhevgrf naq gur Znnpunguvgrf, naq unys Tvyrnq, gur obeqre bs Fvuba
xvat bs Urfuoba.

12:6 Gurz qvq Zbfrf gur freinag bs gur YBEQ naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry
fzvgr: naq Zbfrf gur freinag bs gur YBEQ tnir vg sbe n cbffrffvba hagb
gur Erhoravgrf, naq gur Tnqvgrf, naq gur unys gevor bs Znanffru.

12:7 Naq gurfr ner gur xvatf bs gur pbhagel juvpu Wbfuhn naq gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry fzbgr ba guvf fvqr Wbeqna ba gur jrfg, sebz Onnytnq
va gur inyyrl bs Yronaba rira hagb gur zbhag Unynx, gung tbrgu hc gb
Frve; juvpu Wbfuhn tnir hagb gur gevorf bs Vfenry sbe n cbffrffvba
nppbeqvat gb gurve qvivfvbaf; 12:8 Va gur zbhagnvaf, naq va gur
inyyrlf, naq va gur cynvaf, naq va gur fcevatf, naq va gur jvyqrearff,
naq va gur fbhgu pbhagel; gur Uvggvgrf, gur Nzbevgrf, naq gur
Pnannavgrf, gur Crevmmvgrf, gur Uvivgrf, naq gur Wrohfvgrf: 12:9 Gur
xvat bs Wrevpub, bar; gur xvat bs Nv, juvpu vf orfvqr Orgury, bar;
12:10 Gur xvat bs Wrehfnyrz, bar; gur xvat bs Uroeba, bar; 12:11 Gur
xvat bs Wnezhgu, bar; gur xvat bs Ynpuvfu, bar; 12:12 Gur xvat bs
Rtyba, bar; gur xvat bs Trmre, bar; 12:13 Gur xvat bs Qrove, bar; gur
xvat bs Trqre, bar; 12:14 Gur xvat bs Ubeznu, bar; gur xvat bs Nenq,
bar; 12:15 Gur xvat bs Yvoanu, bar; gur xvat bs Nqhyynz, bar; 12:16
Gur xvat bs Znxxrqnu, bar; gur xvat bs Orgury, bar; 12:17 Gur xvat bs
Gncchnu, bar; gur xvat bs Urcure, bar; 12:18 Gur xvat bs Ncurx, bar;
gur xvat bs Ynfuneba, bar; 12:19 Gur xvat bs Znqba, bar; gur xvat bs
Unmbe, bar; 12:20 Gur xvat bs Fuvzebazreba, bar; gur xvat bs Npufuncu,
bar; 12:21 Gur xvat bs Gnnanpu, bar; gur xvat bs Zrtvqqb, bar; 12:22
Gur xvat bs Xrqrfu, bar; gur xvat bs Wbxarnz bs Pnezry, bar; 12:23 Gur
xvat bs Qbe va gur pbnfg bs Qbe, bar; gur xvat bs gur angvbaf bs
Tvytny, bar; 12:24 Gur xvat bs Gvemnu, bar: nyy gur xvatf guvegl naq
bar.

13:1 Abj Wbfuhn jnf byq naq fgevpxra va lrnef; naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb
uvz, Gubh neg byq naq fgevpxra va lrnef, naq gurer erznvargu lrg irel
zhpu ynaq gb or cbffrffrq.

13:2 Guvf vf gur ynaq gung lrg erznvargu: nyy gur obeqref bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf, naq nyy Trfuhev, 13:3 Sebz Fvube, juvpu vf orsber Rtlcg,
rira hagb gur obeqref bs Rxeba abegujneq, juvpu vf pbhagrq gb gur
Pnannavgr: svir ybeqf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf; gur Tnmnguvgrf, naq gur
Nfuqbguvgrf, gur Rfuxnybavgrf, gur Tvggvgrf, naq gur Rxebavgrf; nyfb
gur Nivgrf: 13:4 Sebz gur fbhgu, nyy gur ynaq bs gur Pnannavgrf, naq
Zrnenu gung vf orfvqr gur Fvqbavnaf hagb Ncurx, gb gur obeqref bs gur
Nzbevgrf: 13:5 Naq gur ynaq bs gur Tvoyvgrf, naq nyy Yronaba, gbjneq
gur fhaevfvat, sebz Onnytnq haqre zbhag Urezba hagb gur ragrevat vagb
Unzngu.

13:6 Nyy gur vaunovgnagf bs gur uvyy pbhagel sebz Yronaba hagb
Zvfercubguznvz, naq nyy gur Fvqbavnaf, gurz jvyy V qevir bhg sebz
orsber gur puvyqera bs Vfenry: bayl qvivqr gubh vg ol ybg hagb gur
Vfenryvgrf sbe na vaurevgnapr, nf V unir pbzznaqrq gurr.

13:7 Abj gurersber qvivqr guvf ynaq sbe na vaurevgnapr hagb gur avar
gevorf, naq gur unys gevor bs Znanffru, 13:8 Jvgu jubz gur Erhoravgrf
naq gur Tnqvgrf unir erprvirq gurve vaurevgnapr, juvpu Zbfrf tnir
gurz, orlbaq Wbeqna rnfgjneq, rira nf Zbfrf gur freinag bs gur YBEQ
tnir gurz; 13:9 Sebz Nebre, gung vf hcba gur onax bs gur evire Neaba,
naq gur pvgl gung vf va gur zvqfg bs gur evire, naq nyy gur cynva bs
Zrqron hagb Qvoba; 13:10 Naq nyy gur pvgvrf bs Fvuba xvat bs gur
Nzbevgrf, juvpu ervtarq va Urfuoba, hagb gur obeqre bs gur puvyqera bs
Nzzba; 13:11 Naq Tvyrnq, naq gur obeqre bs gur Trfuhevgrf naq
Znnpunguvgrf, naq nyy zbhag Urezba, naq nyy Onfuna hagb Fnypnu; 13:12
Nyy gur xvatqbz bs Bt va Onfuna, juvpu ervtarq va Nfugnebgu naq va
Rqerv, jub erznvarq bs gur erzanag bs gur tvnagf: sbe gurfr qvq Zbfrf
fzvgr, naq pnfg gurz bhg.

13:13 Arireguryrff gur puvyqera bs Vfenry rkcryyrq abg gur Trfuhevgrf,
abe gur Znnpunguvgrf: ohg gur Trfuhevgrf naq gur Znnpunguvgrf qjryy
nzbat gur Vfenryvgrf hagvy guvf qnl.

13:14 Bayl hagb gur gevorf bs Yriv ur tnir abar vaurevgnapr; gur
fnpevsvprf bs gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry znqr ol sver ner gurve
vaurevgnapr, nf ur fnvq hagb gurz.

13:15 Naq Zbfrf tnir hagb gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Erhora
vaurevgnapr nppbeqvat gb gurve snzvyvrf.

13:16 Naq gurve pbnfg jnf sebz Nebre, gung vf ba gur onax bs gur evire
Neaba, naq gur pvgl gung vf va gur zvqfg bs gur evire, naq nyy gur
cynva ol Zrqron; 13:17 Urfuoba, naq nyy ure pvgvrf gung ner va gur
cynva; Qvoba, naq Onzbguonny, naq Orguonnyzrba, 13:18 Naq Wnunmn, naq
Xrqrzbgu, naq Zrcunngu, 13:19 Naq Xvewngunvz, naq Fvoznu, naq
Mnergufunune va gur zbhag bs gur inyyrl, 13:20 Naq Orgucrbe, naq
Nfuqbgucvftnu, naq Orguwrfuvzbgu, 13:21 Naq nyy gur pvgvrf bs gur
cynva, naq nyy gur xvatqbz bs Fvuba xvat bs gur Nzbevgrf, juvpu
ervtarq va Urfuoba, jubz Zbfrf fzbgr jvgu gur cevaprf bs Zvqvna, Riv,
naq Erxrz, naq Mhe, naq Uhe, naq Eron, juvpu jrer qhxrf bs Fvuba,
qjryyvat va gur pbhagel.

13:22 Onynnz nyfb gur fba bs Orbe, gur fbbgufnlre, qvq gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry fynl jvgu gur fjbeq nzbat gurz gung jrer fynva ol gurz.

13:23 Naq gur obeqre bs gur puvyqera bs Erhora jnf Wbeqna, naq gur
obeqre gurerbs. Guvf jnf gur vaurevgnapr bs gur puvyqera bs Erhora
nsgre gurve snzvyvrf, gur pvgvrf naq gur ivyyntrf gurerbs.

13:24 Naq Zbfrf tnir vaurevgnapr hagb gur gevor bs Tnq, rira hagb gur
puvyqera bs Tnq nppbeqvat gb gurve snzvyvrf.

13:25 Naq gurve pbnfg jnf Wnmre, naq nyy gur pvgvrf bs Tvyrnq, naq
unys gur ynaq bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba, hagb Nebre gung vf orsber
Enoonu; 13:26 Naq sebz Urfuoba hagb Enznguzvmcru, naq Orgbavz; naq
sebz Znunanvz hagb gur obeqre bs Qrove; 13:27 Naq va gur inyyrl,
Orgunenz, naq Orguavzenu, naq Fhppbgu, naq Mncuba, gur erfg bs gur
xvatqbz bs Fvuba xvat bs Urfuoba, Wbeqna naq uvf obeqre, rira hagb gur
rqtr bs gur frn bs Puvaarergu ba gur bgure fvqr Wbeqna rnfgjneq.

13:28 Guvf vf gur vaurevgnapr bs gur puvyqera bs Tnq nsgre gurve
snzvyvrf, gur pvgvrf, naq gurve ivyyntrf.

13:29 Naq Zbfrf tnir vaurevgnapr hagb gur unys gevor bs Znanffru: naq
guvf jnf gur cbffrffvba bs gur unys gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Znanffru
ol gurve snzvyvrf.

13:30 Naq gurve pbnfg jnf sebz Znunanvz, nyy Onfuna, nyy gur xvatqbz
bs Bt xvat bs Onfuna, naq nyy gur gbjaf bs Wnve, juvpu ner va Onfuna,
guerrfpber pvgvrf: 13:31 Naq unys Tvyrnq, naq Nfugnebgu, naq Rqerv,
pvgvrf bs gur xvatqbz bs Bt va Onfuna, jrer cregnvavat hagb gur
puvyqera bs Znpuve gur fba bs Znanffru, rira gb gur bar unys bs gur
puvyqera bs Znpuve ol gurve snzvyvrf.

13:32 Gurfr ner gur pbhagevrf juvpu Zbfrf qvq qvfgevohgr sbe
vaurevgnapr va gur cynvaf bs Zbno, ba gur bgure fvqr Wbeqna, ol
Wrevpub, rnfgjneq.

13:33 Ohg hagb gur gevor bs Yriv Zbfrf tnir abg nal vaurevgnapr: gur
YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry jnf gurve vaurevgnapr, nf ur fnvq hagb gurz.

14:1 Naq gurfr ner gur pbhagevrf juvpu gur puvyqera bs Vfenry
vaurevgrq va gur ynaq bs Pnanna, juvpu Ryrnmne gur cevrfg, naq Wbfuhn
gur fba bs Aha, naq gur urnqf bs gur snguref bs gur gevorf bs gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, qvfgevohgrq sbe vaurevgnapr gb gurz.

14:2 Ol ybg jnf gurve vaurevgnapr, nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq ol gur unaq
bs Zbfrf, sbe gur avar gevorf, naq sbe gur unys gevor.

14:3 Sbe Zbfrf unq tvira gur vaurevgnapr bs gjb gevorf naq na unys
gevor ba gur bgure fvqr Wbeqna: ohg hagb gur Yrivgrf ur tnir abar
vaurevgnapr nzbat gurz.

14:4 Sbe gur puvyqera bs Wbfrcu jrer gjb gevorf, Znanffru naq Rcuenvz:
gurersber gurl tnir ab cneg hagb gur Yrivgrf va gur ynaq, fnir pvgvrf
gb qjryy va, jvgu gurve fhoheof sbe gurve pnggyr naq sbe gurve
fhofgnapr.

14:5 Nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf, fb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq, naq
gurl qvivqrq gur ynaq.

14:6 Gura gur puvyqera bs Whqnu pnzr hagb Wbfuhn va Tvytny: naq Pnyro
gur fba bs Wrcuhaaru gur Xrarmvgr fnvq hagb uvz, Gubh xabjrfg gur
guvat gung gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Zbfrf gur zna bs Tbq pbapreavat zr naq
gurr va Xnqrfuonearn.

14:7 Sbegl lrnef byq jnf V jura Zbfrf gur freinag bs gur YBEQ frag zr
sebz Xnqrfuonearn gb rfcl bhg gur ynaq; naq V oebhtug uvz jbeq ntnva
nf vg jnf va zvar urneg.

14:8 Arireguryrff zl oerguera gung jrag hc jvgu zr znqr gur urneg bs
gur crbcyr zryg: ohg V jubyyl sbyybjrq gur YBEQ zl Tbq.

14:9 Naq Zbfrf fjner ba gung qnl, fnlvat, Fheryl gur ynaq jurerba gul
srrg unir gebqqra funyy or guvar vaurevgnapr, naq gul puvyqera'f sbe
rire, orpnhfr gubh unfg jubyyl sbyybjrq gur YBEQ zl Tbq.

14:10 Naq abj, orubyq, gur YBEQ ungu xrcg zr nyvir, nf ur fnvq, gurfr
sbegl naq svir lrnef, rira fvapr gur YBEQ fcnxr guvf jbeq hagb Zbfrf,
juvyr gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jnaqrerq va gur jvyqrearff: naq abj, yb,
V nz guvf qnl sbhefpber naq svir lrnef byq.

14:11 Nf lrg V nz nf fgebat guvf qnl nf V jnf va gur qnl gung Zbfrf
frag zr: nf zl fgeratgu jnf gura, rira fb vf zl fgeratgu abj, sbe jne,
obgu gb tb bhg, naq gb pbzr va.

14:12 Abj gurersber tvir zr guvf zbhagnva, jurerbs gur YBEQ fcnxr va
gung qnl; sbe gubh urneqrfg va gung qnl ubj gur Nanxvzf jrer gurer,
naq gung gur pvgvrf jrer terng naq sraprq: vs fb or gur YBEQ jvyy or
jvgu zr, gura V funyy or noyr gb qevir gurz bhg, nf gur YBEQ fnvq.

14:13 Naq Wbfuhn oyrffrq uvz, naq tnir hagb Pnyro gur fba bs Wrcuhaaru
Uroeba sbe na vaurevgnapr.

14:14 Uroeba gurersber orpnzr gur vaurevgnapr bs Pnyro gur fba bs
Wrcuhaaru gur Xrarmvgr hagb guvf qnl, orpnhfr gung ur jubyyl sbyybjrq
gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry.

14:15 Naq gur anzr bs Uroeba orsber jnf Xvewnguneon; juvpu Neon jnf n
terng zna nzbat gur Nanxvzf. Naq gur ynaq unq erfg sebz jne.

15:1 Guvf gura jnf gur ybg bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Whqnu ol
gurve snzvyvrf; rira gb gur obeqre bs Rqbz gur jvyqrearff bs Mva
fbhgujneq jnf gur hggrezbfg cneg bs gur fbhgu pbnfg.

15:2 Naq gurve fbhgu obeqre jnf sebz gur fuber bs gur fnyg frn, sebz
gur onl gung ybbxrgu fbhgujneq: 15:3 Naq vg jrag bhg gb gur fbhgu fvqr
gb Znnyrunpenoovz, naq cnffrq nybat gb Mva, naq nfpraqrq hc ba gur
fbhgu fvqr hagb Xnqrfuonearn, naq cnffrq nybat gb Urmeba, naq jrag hc
gb Nqne, naq srgpurq n pbzcnff gb Xnexnn: 15:4 Sebz gurapr vg cnffrq
gbjneq Nmzba, naq jrag bhg hagb gur evire bs Rtlcg; naq gur tbvatf bhg
bs gung pbnfg jrer ng gur frn: guvf funyy or lbhe fbhgu pbnfg.

15:5 Naq gur rnfg obeqre jnf gur fnyg frn, rira hagb gur raq bs
Wbeqna.

Naq gurve obeqre va gur abegu dhnegre jnf sebz gur onl bs gur frn ng
gur hggrezbfg cneg bs Wbeqna: 15:6 Naq gur obeqre jrag hc gb
Orguubtyn, naq cnffrq nybat ol gur abegu bs Orgunenonu; naq gur obeqre
jrag hc gb gur fgbar bs Obuna gur fba bs Erhora: 15:7 Naq gur obeqre
jrag hc gbjneq Qrove sebz gur inyyrl bs Npube, naq fb abegujneq,
ybbxvat gbjneq Tvytny, gung vf orsber gur tbvat hc gb Nqhzzvz, juvpu
vf ba gur fbhgu fvqr bs gur evire: naq gur obeqre cnffrq gbjneq gur
jngref bs Rafurzrfu, naq gur tbvatf bhg gurerbs jrer ng Raebtry: 15:8
Naq gur obeqre jrag hc ol gur inyyrl bs gur fba bs Uvaabz hagb gur
fbhgu fvqr bs gur Wrohfvgr; gur fnzr vf Wrehfnyrz: naq gur obeqre jrag
hc gb gur gbc bs gur zbhagnva gung yvrgu orsber gur inyyrl bs Uvaabz
jrfgjneq, juvpu vf ng gur raq bs gur inyyrl bs gur tvnagf abegujneq:
15:9 Naq gur obeqre jnf qenja sebz gur gbc bs gur uvyy hagb gur
sbhagnva bs gur jngre bs Arcugbnu, naq jrag bhg gb gur pvgvrf bs zbhag
Rcueba; naq gur obeqre jnf qenja gb Onnynu, juvpu vf Xvewnguwrnevz:
15:10 Naq gur obeqre pbzcnffrq sebz Onnynu jrfgjneq hagb zbhag Frve,
naq cnffrq nybat hagb gur fvqr bs zbhag Wrnevz, juvpu vf Purfnyba, ba
gur abegu fvqr, naq jrag qbja gb Orgufurzrfu, naq cnffrq ba gb Gvzanu:
15:11 Naq gur obeqre jrag bhg hagb gur fvqr bs Rxeba abegujneq: naq
gur obeqre jnf qenja gb Fuvpeba, naq cnffrq nybat gb zbhag Onnynu, naq
jrag bhg hagb Wnoarry; naq gur tbvatf bhg bs gur obeqre jrer ng gur
frn.

15:12 Naq gur jrfg obeqre jnf gb gur terng frn, naq gur pbnfg gurerbs.

Guvf vf gur pbnfg bs gur puvyqera bs Whqnu ebhaq nobhg nppbeqvat gb
gurve snzvyvrf.

15:13 Naq hagb Pnyro gur fba bs Wrcuhaaru ur tnir n cneg nzbat gur
puvyqera bs Whqnu, nppbeqvat gb gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ gb Wbfuhn,
rira gur pvgl bs Neon gur sngure bs Nanx, juvpu pvgl vf Uroeba.

15:14 Naq Pnyro qebir gurapr gur guerr fbaf bs Nanx, Furfunv, naq
Nuvzna, naq Gnyznv, gur puvyqera bs Nanx.

15:15 Naq ur jrag hc gurapr gb gur vaunovgnagf bs Qrove: naq gur anzr
bs Qrove orsber jnf Xvewngufrcure.

15:16 Naq Pnyro fnvq, Ur gung fzvgrgu Xvewngufrcure, naq gnxrgu vg, gb
uvz jvyy V tvir Npufnu zl qnhtugre gb jvsr.

15:17 Naq Bguavry gur fba bs Xranm, gur oebgure bs Pnyro, gbbx vg: naq
ur tnir uvz Npufnu uvf qnhtugre gb jvsr.

15:18 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf fur pnzr hagb uvz, gung fur zbirq uvz gb
nfx bs ure sngure n svryq: naq fur yvtugrq bss ure nff; naq Pnyro fnvq
hagb ure, Jung jbhyqrfg gubh?  15:19 Jub nafjrerq, Tvir zr n oyrffvat;
sbe gubh unfg tvira zr n fbhgu ynaq; tvir zr nyfb fcevatf bs jngre.
Naq ur tnir ure gur hccre fcevatf, naq gur argure fcevatf.

15:20 Guvf vf gur vaurevgnapr bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Whqnu
nppbeqvat gb gurve snzvyvrf.

15:21 Naq gur hggrezbfg pvgvrf bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Whqnu
gbjneq gur pbnfg bs Rqbz fbhgujneq jrer Xnomrry, naq Rqre, naq Wnthe,
15:22 Naq Xvanu, naq Qvzbanu, naq Nqnqnu, 15:23 Naq Xrqrfu, naq Unmbe,
naq Vguana, 15:24 Mvcu, naq Gryrz, naq Ornybgu, 15:25 Naq Unmbe,
Unqnggnu, naq Xrevbgu, naq Urmeba, juvpu vf Unmbe, 15:26 Nznz, naq
Furzn, naq Zbynqnu, 15:27 Naq Unmnetnqqnu, naq Urfuzba, naq Orgucnyrg,
15:28 Naq Unmnefuhny, naq Orrefuron, naq Ovmwbguwnu, 15:29 Onnynu, naq
Vvz, naq Nmrz, 15:30 Naq Rygbynq, naq Purfvy, naq Ubeznu, 15:31 Naq
Mvxynt, naq Znqznaanu, naq Fnafnaanu, 15:32 Naq Yronbgu, naq Fuvyuvz,
naq Nva, naq Evzzba: nyy gur pvgvrf ner gjragl naq avar, jvgu gurve
ivyyntrf: 15:33 Naq va gur inyyrl, Rfugnby, naq Mbernu, naq Nfuanu,
15:34 Naq Mnabnu, naq Ratnaavz, Gncchnu, naq Ranz, 15:35 Wnezhgu, naq
Nqhyynz, Fbpbu, naq Nmrxnu, 15:36 Naq Funenvz, naq Nqvgunvz, naq
Trqrenu, naq Trqrebgunvz; sbhegrra pvgvrf jvgu gurve ivyyntrf: 15:37
Mrana, naq Unqnfunu, naq Zvtqnytnq, 15:38 Naq Qvyrna, naq Zvmcru, naq
Wbxgurry, 15:39 Ynpuvfu, naq Obmxngu, naq Rtyba, 15:40 Naq Pnooba, naq
Ynuznz, naq Xvguyvfu, 15:41 Naq Trqrebgu, Orguqntba, naq Annznu, naq
Znxxrqnu; fvkgrra pvgvrf jvgu gurve ivyyntrf: 15:42 Yvoanu, naq Rgure,
naq Nfuna, 15:43 Naq Wvcugnu, naq Nfuanu, naq Armvo, 15:44 Naq Xrvynu,
naq Npumvo, naq Znerfunu; avar pvgvrf jvgu gurve ivyyntrf: 15:45
Rxeba, jvgu ure gbjaf naq ure ivyyntrf: 15:46 Sebz Rxeba rira hagb gur
frn, nyy gung ynl arne Nfuqbq, jvgu gurve ivyyntrf: 15:47 Nfuqbq jvgu
ure gbjaf naq ure ivyyntrf, Tnmn jvgu ure gbjaf naq ure ivyyntrf, hagb
gur evire bs Rtlcg, naq gur terng frn, naq gur obeqre gurerbs: 15:48
Naq va gur zbhagnvaf, Funzve, naq Wnggve, naq Fbpbu, 15:49 Naq Qnaanu,
naq Xvewngufnaanu, juvpu vf Qrove, 15:50 Naq Nano, naq Rfugrzbu, naq
Navz, 15:51 Naq Tbfura, naq Ubyba, naq Tvybu; ryrira pvgvrf jvgu gurve
ivyyntrf: 15:52 Neno, naq Qhznu, naq Rfurna, 15:53 Naq Wnahz, naq
Orgugncchnu, naq Ncurxnu, 15:54 Naq Uhzgnu, naq Xvewnguneon, juvpu vf
Uroeba, naq Mvbe; avar pvgvrf jvgu gurve ivyyntrf: 15:55 Znba, Pnezry,
naq Mvcu, naq Whggnu, 15:56 Naq Wrmerry, naq Wbxqrnz, naq Mnabnu,
15:57 Pnva, Tvornu, naq Gvzanu; gra pvgvrf jvgu gurve ivyyntrf: 15:58
Unyuhy, Orgumhe, naq Trqbe, 15:59 Naq Znnengu, naq Orgunabgu, naq
Rygrxba; fvk pvgvrf jvgu gurve ivyyntrf: 15:60 Xvewnguonny, juvpu vf
Xvewnguwrnevz, naq Enoonu; gjb pvgvrf jvgu gurve ivyyntrf: 15:61 Va
gur jvyqrearff, Orgunenonu, Zvqqva, naq Frpnpnu, 15:62 Naq Avofuna,
naq gur pvgl bs Fnyg, naq Ratrqv; fvk pvgvrf jvgu gurve ivyyntrf.

15:63 Nf sbe gur Wrohfvgrf gur vaunovgnagf bs Wrehfnyrz, gur puvyqera
bs Whqnu pbhyq abg qevir gurz bhg; ohg gur Wrohfvgrf qjryy jvgu gur
puvyqera bs Whqnu ng Wrehfnyrz hagb guvf qnl.

16:1 Naq gur ybg bs gur puvyqera bs Wbfrcu sryy sebz Wbeqna ol
Wrevpub, hagb gur jngre bs Wrevpub ba gur rnfg, gb gur jvyqrearff gung
tbrgu hc sebz Wrevpub guebhtubhg zbhag Orgury, 16:2 Naq tbrgu bhg sebz
Orgury gb Yhm, naq cnffrgu nybat hagb gur obeqref bs Nepuv gb Ngnebgu,
16:3 Naq tbrgu qbja jrfgjneq gb gur pbnfg bs Wncuyrgv, hagb gur pbnfg
bs Orguubeba gur argure, naq gb Trmre; naq gur tbvatf bhg gurerbs ner
ng gur frn.

16:4 Fb gur puvyqera bs Wbfrcu, Znanffru naq Rcuenvz, gbbx gurve
vaurevgnapr.

16:5 Naq gur obeqre bs gur puvyqera bs Rcuenvz nppbeqvat gb gurve
snzvyvrf jnf guhf: rira gur obeqre bs gurve vaurevgnapr ba gur rnfg
fvqr jnf Ngnebgunqqne, hagb Orguubeba gur hccre; 16:6 Naq gur obeqre
jrag bhg gbjneq gur frn gb Zvpuzrgunu ba gur abegu fvqr; naq gur
obeqre jrag nobhg rnfgjneq hagb Gnnangufuvybu, naq cnffrq ol vg ba gur
rnfg gb Wnabunu; 16:7 Naq vg jrag qbja sebz Wnabunu gb Ngnebgu, naq gb
Annengu, naq pnzr gb Wrevpub, naq jrag bhg ng Wbeqna.

16:8 Gur obeqre jrag bhg sebz Gncchnu jrfgjneq hagb gur evire Xnanu;
naq gur tbvatf bhg gurerbs jrer ng gur frn. Guvf vf gur vaurevgnapr bs
gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Rcuenvz ol gurve snzvyvrf.

16:9 Naq gur frcnengr pvgvrf sbe gur puvyqera bs Rcuenvz jrer nzbat
gur vaurevgnapr bs gur puvyqera bs Znanffru, nyy gur pvgvrf jvgu gurve
ivyyntrf.

16:10 Naq gurl qenir abg bhg gur Pnannavgrf gung qjryg va Trmre: ohg
gur Pnannavgrf qjryy nzbat gur Rcuenvzvgrf hagb guvf qnl, naq freir
haqre gevohgr.

17:1 Gurer jnf nyfb n ybg sbe gur gevor bs Znanffru; sbe ur jnf gur
svefgobea bs Wbfrcu; gb jvg, sbe Znpuve gur svefgobea bs Znanffru, gur
sngure bs Tvyrnq: orpnhfr ur jnf n zna bs jne, gurersber ur unq Tvyrnq
naq Onfuna.

17:2 Gurer jnf nyfb n ybg sbe gur erfg bs gur puvyqera bs Znanffru ol
gurve snzvyvrf; sbe gur puvyqera bs Novrmre, naq sbe gur puvyqera bs
Uryrx, naq sbe gur puvyqera bs Nfevry, naq sbe gur puvyqera bs
Furpurz, naq sbe gur puvyqera bs Urcure, naq sbe gur puvyqera bs
Furzvqn: gurfr jrer gur znyr puvyqera bs Znanffru gur fba bs Wbfrcu ol
gurve snzvyvrf.

17:3 Ohg Mrybcurunq, gur fba bs Urcure, gur fba bs Tvyrnq, gur fba bs
Znpuve, gur fba bs Znanffru, unq ab fbaf, ohg qnhtugref: naq gurfr ner
gur anzrf bs uvf qnhtugref, Znuynu, naq Abnu, Ubtynu, Zvypnu, naq
Gvemnu.

17:4 Naq gurl pnzr arne orsber Ryrnmne gur cevrfg, naq orsber Wbfuhn
gur fba bs Aha, naq orsber gur cevaprf, fnlvat, Gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq
Zbfrf gb tvir hf na vaurevgnapr nzbat bhe oerguera. Gurersber
nppbeqvat gb gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ ur tnir gurz na vaurevgnapr
nzbat gur oerguera bs gurve sngure.

17:5 Naq gurer sryy gra cbegvbaf gb Znanffru, orfvqr gur ynaq bs
Tvyrnq naq Onfuna, juvpu jrer ba gur bgure fvqr Wbeqna; 17:6 Orpnhfr
gur qnhtugref bs Znanffru unq na vaurevgnapr nzbat uvf fbaf: naq gur
erfg bs Znanffru'f fbaf unq gur ynaq bs Tvyrnq.

17:7 Naq gur pbnfg bs Znanffru jnf sebz Nfure gb Zvpuzrgunu, gung
yvrgu orsber Furpurz; naq gur obeqre jrag nybat ba gur evtug unaq hagb
gur vaunovgnagf bs Ragncchnu.

17:8 Abj Znanffru unq gur ynaq bs Gncchnu: ohg Gncchnu ba gur obeqre
bs Znanffru orybatrq gb gur puvyqera bs Rcuenvz; 17:9 Naq gur pbnfg
qrfpraqrq hagb gur evire Xnanu, fbhgujneq bs gur evire: gurfr pvgvrf
bs Rcuenvz ner nzbat gur pvgvrf bs Znanffru: gur pbnfg bs Znanffru
nyfb jnf ba gur abegu fvqr bs gur evire, naq gur bhgtbvatf bs vg jrer
ng gur frn: 17:10 Fbhgujneq vg jnf Rcuenvz'f, naq abegujneq vg jnf
Znanffru'f, naq gur frn vf uvf obeqre; naq gurl zrg gbtrgure va Nfure
ba gur abegu, naq va Vffnpune ba gur rnfg.

17:11 Naq Znanffru unq va Vffnpune naq va Nfure Orgufurna naq ure
gbjaf, naq Voyrnz naq ure gbjaf, naq gur vaunovgnagf bs Qbe naq ure
gbjaf, naq gur vaunovgnagf bs Raqbe naq ure gbjaf, naq gur vaunovgnagf
bs Gnnanpu naq ure gbjaf, naq gur vaunovgnagf bs Zrtvqqb naq ure
gbjaf, rira guerr pbhagevrf.

17:12 Lrg gur puvyqera bs Znanffru pbhyq abg qevir bhg gur vaunovgnagf
bs gubfr pvgvrf; ohg gur Pnannavgrf jbhyq qjryy va gung ynaq.

17:13 Lrg vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jrer jnkra
fgebat, gung gurl chg gur Pnannavgrf gb gevohgr, ohg qvq abg hggreyl
qevir gurz bhg.

17:14 Naq gur puvyqera bs Wbfrcu fcnxr hagb Wbfuhn, fnlvat, Jul unfg
gubh tvira zr ohg bar ybg naq bar cbegvba gb vaurevg, frrvat V nz n
terng crbcyr, sbenfzhpu nf gur YBEQ ungu oyrffrq zr uvguregb?  17:15
Naq Wbfuhn nafjrerq gurz, Vs gubh or n terng crbcyr, gura trg gurr hc
gb gur jbbq pbhagel, naq phg qbja sbe gulfrys gurer va gur ynaq bs gur
Crevmmvgrf naq bs gur tvnagf, vs zbhag Rcuenvz or gbb aneebj sbe gurr.

17:16 Naq gur puvyqera bs Wbfrcu fnvq, Gur uvyy vf abg rabhtu sbe hf:
naq nyy gur Pnannavgrf gung qjryy va gur ynaq bs gur inyyrl unir
punevbgf bs veba, obgu gurl jub ner bs Orgufurna naq ure gbjaf, naq
gurl jub ner bs gur inyyrl bs Wrmerry.

17:17 Naq Wbfuhn fcnxr hagb gur ubhfr bs Wbfrcu, rira gb Rcuenvz naq
gb Znanffru, fnlvat, Gubh neg n terng crbcyr, naq unfg terng cbjre:
gubh funyg abg unir bar ybg bayl: 17:18 Ohg gur zbhagnva funyy or
guvar; sbe vg vf n jbbq, naq gubh funyg phg vg qbja: naq gur bhgtbvatf
bs vg funyy or guvar: sbe gubh funyg qevir bhg gur Pnannavgrf, gubhtu
gurl unir veba punevbgf, naq gubhtu gurl or fgebat.

18:1 Naq gur jubyr pbatertngvba bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry nffrzoyrq
gbtrgure ng Fuvybu, naq frg hc gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba
gurer. Naq gur ynaq jnf fhoqhrq orsber gurz.

18:2 Naq gurer erznvarq nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry frira gevorf,
juvpu unq abg lrg erprvirq gurve vaurevgnapr.

18:3 Naq Wbfuhn fnvq hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, Ubj ybat ner lr
fynpx gb tb gb cbffrff gur ynaq, juvpu gur YBEQ Tbq bs lbhe snguref
ungu tvira lbh?  18:4 Tvir bhg sebz nzbat lbh guerr zra sbe rnpu
gevor: naq V jvyy fraq gurz, naq gurl funyy evfr, naq tb guebhtu gur
ynaq, naq qrfpevor vg nppbeqvat gb gur vaurevgnapr bs gurz; naq gurl
funyy pbzr ntnva gb zr.

18:5 Naq gurl funyy qvivqr vg vagb frira cnegf: Whqnu funyy novqr va
gurve pbnfg ba gur fbhgu, naq gur ubhfr bs Wbfrcu funyy novqr va gurve
pbnfgf ba gur abegu.

18:6 Lr funyy gurersber qrfpevor gur ynaq vagb frira cnegf, naq oevat
gur qrfpevcgvba uvgure gb zr, gung V znl pnfg ybgf sbe lbh urer orsber
gur YBEQ bhe Tbq.

18:7 Ohg gur Yrivgrf unir ab cneg nzbat lbh; sbe gur cevrfgubbq bs gur
YBEQ vf gurve vaurevgnapr: naq Tnq, naq Erhora, naq unys gur gevor bs
Znanffru, unir erprvirq gurve vaurevgnapr orlbaq Wbeqna ba gur rnfg,
juvpu Zbfrf gur freinag bs gur YBEQ tnir gurz.

18:8 Naq gur zra nebfr, naq jrag njnl: naq Wbfuhn punetrq gurz gung
jrag gb qrfpevor gur ynaq, fnlvat, Tb naq jnyx guebhtu gur ynaq, naq
qrfpevor vg, naq pbzr ntnva gb zr, gung V znl urer pnfg ybgf sbe lbh
orsber gur YBEQ va Fuvybu.

18:9 Naq gur zra jrag naq cnffrq guebhtu gur ynaq, naq qrfpevorq vg ol
pvgvrf vagb frira cnegf va n obbx, naq pnzr ntnva gb Wbfuhn gb gur
ubfg ng Fuvybu.

18:10 Naq Wbfuhn pnfg ybgf sbe gurz va Fuvybu orsber gur YBEQ: naq
gurer Wbfuhn qvivqrq gur ynaq hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry nppbeqvat gb
gurve qvivfvbaf.

18:11 Naq gur ybg bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva pnzr hc
nppbeqvat gb gurve snzvyvrf: naq gur pbnfg bs gurve ybg pnzr sbegu
orgjrra gur puvyqera bs Whqnu naq gur puvyqera bs Wbfrcu.

18:12 Naq gurve obeqre ba gur abegu fvqr jnf sebz Wbeqna; naq gur
obeqre jrag hc gb gur fvqr bs Wrevpub ba gur abegu fvqr, naq jrag hc
guebhtu gur zbhagnvaf jrfgjneq; naq gur tbvatf bhg gurerbs jrer ng gur
jvyqrearff bs Orgunira.

18:13 Naq gur obeqre jrag bire sebz gurapr gbjneq Yhm, gb gur fvqr bs
Yhm, juvpu vf Orgury, fbhgujneq; naq gur obeqre qrfpraqrq gb
Ngnebgunqne, arne gur uvyy gung yvrgu ba gur fbhgu fvqr bs gur argure
Orguubeba.

18:14 Naq gur obeqre jnf qenja gurapr, naq pbzcnffrq gur pbeare bs gur
frn fbhgujneq, sebz gur uvyy gung yvrgu orsber Orguubeba fbhgujneq;
naq gur tbvatf bhg gurerbs jrer ng Xvewnguonny, juvpu vf
Xvewnguwrnevz, n pvgl bs gur puvyqera bs Whqnu: guvf jnf gur jrfg
dhnegre.

18:15 Naq gur fbhgu dhnegre jnf sebz gur raq bs Xvewnguwrnevz, naq gur
obeqre jrag bhg ba gur jrfg, naq jrag bhg gb gur jryy bs jngref bs
Arcugbnu: 18:16 Naq gur obeqre pnzr qbja gb gur raq bs gur zbhagnva
gung yvrgu orsber gur inyyrl bs gur fba bs Uvaabz, naq juvpu vf va gur
inyyrl bs gur tvnagf ba gur abegu, naq qrfpraqrq gb gur inyyrl bs
Uvaabz, gb gur fvqr bs Wrohfv ba gur fbhgu, naq qrfpraqrq gb Raebtry,
18:17 Naq jnf qenja sebz gur abegu, naq jrag sbegu gb Rafurzrfu, naq
jrag sbegu gbjneq Tryvybgu, juvpu vf bire ntnvafg gur tbvat hc bs
Nqhzzvz, naq qrfpraqrq gb gur fgbar bs Obuna gur fba bs Erhora, 18:18
Naq cnffrq nybat gbjneq gur fvqr bire ntnvafg Nenonu abegujneq, naq
jrag qbja hagb Nenonu: 18:19 Naq gur obeqre cnffrq nybat gb gur fvqr
bs Orguubtynu abegujneq: naq gur bhgtbvatf bs gur obeqre jrer ng gur
abegu onl bs gur fnyg frn ng gur fbhgu raq bs Wbeqna: guvf jnf gur
fbhgu pbnfg.

18:20 Naq Wbeqna jnf gur obeqre bs vg ba gur rnfg fvqr. Guvf jnf gur
vaurevgnapr bs gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva, ol gur pbnfgf gurerbs ebhaq
nobhg, nppbeqvat gb gurve snzvyvrf.

18:21 Abj gur pvgvrf bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva
nppbeqvat gb gurve snzvyvrf jrer Wrevpub, naq Orguubtynu, naq gur
inyyrl bs Xrmvm, 18:22 Naq Orgunenonu, naq Mrznenvz, naq Orgury, 18:23
Naq Nivz, naq Cunenu, naq Bcuenu, 18:24 Naq Purcuneunnzzbanv, naq
Bcuav, naq Tnon; gjryir pvgvrf jvgu gurve ivyyntrf: 18:25 Tvorba, naq
Enznu, naq Orrebgu, 18:26 Naq Zvmcru, naq Purcuvenu, naq Zbmnu, 18:27
Naq Erxrz, naq Vecrry, naq Gnenynu, 18:28 Naq Mrynu, Ryrcu, naq
Wrohfv, juvpu vf Wrehfnyrz, Tvorngu, naq Xvewngu; sbhegrra pvgvrf jvgu
gurve ivyyntrf. Guvf vf gur vaurevgnapr bs gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva
nppbeqvat gb gurve snzvyvrf.

19:1 Naq gur frpbaq ybg pnzr sbegu gb Fvzrba, rira sbe gur gevor bs
gur puvyqera bs Fvzrba nppbeqvat gb gurve snzvyvrf: naq gurve
vaurevgnapr jnf jvguva gur vaurevgnapr bs gur puvyqera bs Whqnu.

19:2 Naq gurl unq va gurve vaurevgnapr Orrefuron, naq Furon, naq
Zbynqnu, 19:3 Naq Unmnefuhny, naq Onynu, naq Nmrz, 19:4 Naq Rygbynq,
naq Orguhy, naq Ubeznu, 19:5 Naq Mvxynt, naq Orguznepnobgu, naq
Unmnefhfnu, 19:6 Naq Orguyronbgu, naq Funehura; guvegrra pvgvrf naq
gurve ivyyntrf: 19:7 Nva, Erzzba, naq Rgure, naq Nfuna; sbhe pvgvrf
naq gurve ivyyntrf: 19:8 Naq nyy gur ivyyntrf gung jrer ebhaq nobhg
gurfr pvgvrf gb Onnynguorre, Enzngu bs gur fbhgu. Guvf vf gur
vaurevgnapr bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Fvzrba nppbeqvat gb gurve
snzvyvrf.

19:9 Bhg bs gur cbegvba bs gur puvyqera bs Whqnu jnf gur vaurevgnapr
bs gur puvyqera bs Fvzrba: sbe gur cneg bs gur puvyqera bs Whqnu jnf
gbb zhpu sbe gurz: gurersber gur puvyqera bs Fvzrba unq gurve
vaurevgnapr jvguva gur vaurevgnapr bs gurz.

19:10 Naq gur guveq ybg pnzr hc sbe gur puvyqera bs Mrohyha nppbeqvat
gb gurve snzvyvrf: naq gur obeqre bs gurve vaurevgnapr jnf hagb Fnevq:
19:11 Naq gurve obeqre jrag hc gbjneq gur frn, naq Znenynu, naq
ernpurq gb Qnoonfurgu, naq ernpurq gb gur evire gung vf orsber
Wbxarnz; 19:12 Naq ghearq sebz Fnevq rnfgjneq gbjneq gur fhaevfvat
hagb gur obeqre bs Puvfybgugnobe, naq gura tbrgu bhg gb Qnorengu, naq
tbrgu hc gb Wncuvn, 19:13 Naq sebz gurapr cnffrgu ba nybat ba gur rnfg
gb Tvggnuurcure, gb Vggnuxnmva, naq tbrgu bhg gb Erzzbazrgubne gb
Arnu; 19:14 Naq gur obeqre pbzcnffrgu vg ba gur abegu fvqr gb
Unaanguba: naq gur bhgtbvatf gurerbs ner va gur inyyrl bs Wvcugunury:
19:15 Naq Xnggngu, naq Anunyyny, naq Fuvzeba, naq Vqnynu, naq
Orguyrurz: gjryir pvgvrf jvgu gurve ivyyntrf.

19:16 Guvf vf gur vaurevgnapr bs gur puvyqera bs Mrohyha nppbeqvat gb
gurve snzvyvrf, gurfr pvgvrf jvgu gurve ivyyntrf.

19:17 Naq gur sbhegu ybg pnzr bhg gb Vffnpune, sbe gur puvyqera bs
Vffnpune nppbeqvat gb gurve snzvyvrf.

19:18 Naq gurve obeqre jnf gbjneq Wrmerry, naq Purfhyybgu, naq Fuharz,
19:19 Naq Uncuenvz, naq Fuvuba, naq Nanunengu, 19:20 Naq Enoovgu, naq
Xvfuvba, naq Norm, 19:21 Naq Erzrgu, naq Ratnaavz, naq Raunqqnu, naq
Orgucnmmrm; 19:22 Naq gur pbnfg ernpurgu gb Gnobe, naq Fununmvznu, naq
Orgufurzrfu; naq gur bhgtbvatf bs gurve obeqre jrer ng Wbeqna: fvkgrra
pvgvrf jvgu gurve ivyyntrf.

19:23 Guvf vf gur vaurevgnapr bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Vffnpune
nppbeqvat gb gurve snzvyvrf, gur pvgvrf naq gurve ivyyntrf.

19:24 Naq gur svsgu ybg pnzr bhg sbe gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs
Nfure nppbeqvat gb gurve snzvyvrf.

19:25 Naq gurve obeqre jnf Uryxngu, naq Unyv, naq Orgra, naq Npufuncu,
19:26 Naq Nynzzryrpu, naq Nznq, naq Zvfurny; naq ernpurgu gb Pnezry
jrfgjneq, naq gb Fuvubeyvoangu; 19:27 Naq gheargu gbjneq gur fhaevfvat
gb Orguqntba, naq ernpurgu gb Mrohyha, naq gb gur inyyrl bs Wvcugunury
gbjneq gur abegu fvqr bs Orgurzrx, naq Arvry, naq tbrgu bhg gb Pnohy
ba gur yrsg unaq, 19:28 Naq Uroeba, naq Erubo, naq Unzzba, naq Xnanu,
rira hagb terng Mvqba; 19:29 Naq gura gur pbnfg gheargu gb Enznu, naq
gb gur fgebat pvgl Gler; naq gur pbnfg gheargu gb Ubfnu; naq gur
bhgtbvatf gurerbs ner ng gur frn sebz gur pbnfg gb Npumvo: 19:30 Hzznu
nyfb, naq Ncurx, naq Erubo: gjragl naq gjb pvgvrf jvgu gurve ivyyntrf.

19:31 Guvf vf gur vaurevgnapr bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Nfure
nppbeqvat gb gurve snzvyvrf, gurfr pvgvrf jvgu gurve ivyyntrf.

19:32 Gur fvkgu ybg pnzr bhg gb gur puvyqera bs Ancugnyv, rira sbe gur
puvyqera bs Ancugnyv nppbeqvat gb gurve snzvyvrf.

19:33 Naq gurve pbnfg jnf sebz Uryrcu, sebz Nyyba gb Mnnanaavz, naq
Nqnzv, Arxro, naq Wnoarry, hagb Ynxhz; naq gur bhgtbvatf gurerbs jrer
ng Wbeqna: 19:34 Naq gura gur pbnfg gheargu jrfgjneq gb Nmabgugnobe,
naq tbrgu bhg sebz gurapr gb Uhxxbx, naq ernpurgu gb Mrohyha ba gur
fbhgu fvqr, naq ernpurgu gb Nfure ba gur jrfg fvqr, naq gb Whqnu hcba
Wbeqna gbjneq gur fhaevfvat.

19:35 Naq gur sraprq pvgvrf ner Mvqqvz, Mre, naq Unzzngu, Enxxngu, naq
Puvaarergu, 19:36 Naq Nqnznu, naq Enznu, naq Unmbe, 19:37 Naq Xrqrfu,
naq Rqerv, naq Raunmbe, 19:38 Naq Veba, naq Zvtqnyry, Uberz, naq
Orgunangu, naq Orgufurzrfu; avargrra pvgvrf jvgu gurve ivyyntrf.

19:39 Guvf vf gur vaurevgnapr bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Ancugnyv
nppbeqvat gb gurve snzvyvrf, gur pvgvrf naq gurve ivyyntrf.

19:40 Naq gur friragu ybg pnzr bhg sbe gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs
Qna nppbeqvat gb gurve snzvyvrf.

19:41 Naq gur pbnfg bs gurve vaurevgnapr jnf Mbenu, naq Rfugnby, naq
Vefurzrfu, 19:42 Naq Funnynoova, naq Nwnyba, naq Wrguynu, 19:43 Naq
Ryba, naq Guvzangunu, naq Rxeba, 19:44 Naq Rygrxru, naq Tvoorguba, naq
Onnyngu, 19:45 Naq Wruhq, naq Orarorenx, naq Tnguevzzba, 19:46 Naq
Zrwnexba, naq Enxxba, jvgu gur obeqre orsber Wncub.

19:47 Naq gur pbnfg bs gur puvyqera bs Qna jrag bhg gbb yvggyr sbe
gurz: gurersber gur puvyqera bs Qna jrag hc gb svtug ntnvafg Yrfurz,
naq gbbx vg, naq fzbgr vg jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq, naq cbffrffrq
vg, naq qjryg gurerva, naq pnyyrq Yrfurz, Qna, nsgre gur anzr bs Qna
gurve sngure.

19:48 Guvf vf gur vaurevgnapr bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Qna
nppbeqvat gb gurve snzvyvrf, gurfr pvgvrf jvgu gurve ivyyntrf.

19:49 Jura gurl unq znqr na raq bs qvivqvat gur ynaq sbe vaurevgnapr
ol gurve pbnfgf, gur puvyqera bs Vfenry tnir na vaurevgnapr gb Wbfuhn
gur fba bs Aha nzbat gurz: 19:50 Nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ
gurl tnir uvz gur pvgl juvpu ur nfxrq, rira Gvzangufrenu va zbhag
Rcuenvz: naq ur ohvyg gur pvgl, naq qjryg gurerva.

19:51 Gurfr ner gur vaurevgnaprf, juvpu Ryrnmne gur cevrfg, naq Wbfuhn
gur fba bs Aha, naq gur urnqf bs gur snguref bs gur gevorf bs gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, qvivqrq sbe na vaurevgnapr ol ybg va Fuvybu orsber
gur YBEQ, ng gur qbbe bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba. Fb gurl
znqr na raq bs qvivqvat gur pbhagel.

20:1 Gur YBEQ nyfb fcnxr hagb Wbfuhn, fnlvat, 20:2 Fcrnx gb gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Nccbvag bhg sbe lbh pvgvrf bs ershtr,
jurerbs V fcnxr hagb lbh ol gur unaq bs Zbfrf: 20:3 Gung gur fynlre
gung xvyyrgu nal crefba hanjnerf naq hajvggvatyl znl syrr guvgure: naq
gurl funyy or lbhe ershtr sebz gur niratre bs oybbq.

20:4 Naq jura ur gung qbgu syrr hagb bar bs gubfr pvgvrf funyy fgnaq
ng gur ragrevat bs gur tngr bs gur pvgl, naq funyy qrpyner uvf pnhfr
va gur rnef bs gur ryqref bs gung pvgl, gurl funyy gnxr uvz vagb gur
pvgl hagb gurz, naq tvir uvz n cynpr, gung ur znl qjryy nzbat gurz.

20:5 Naq vs gur niratre bs oybbq chefhr nsgre uvz, gura gurl funyy abg
qryvire gur fynlre hc vagb uvf unaq; orpnhfr ur fzbgr uvf arvtuobhe
hajvggvatyl, naq ungrq uvz abg orsbergvzr.

20:6 Naq ur funyy qjryy va gung pvgl, hagvy ur fgnaq orsber gur
pbatertngvba sbe whqtzrag, naq hagvy gur qrngu bs gur uvtu cevrfg gung
funyy or va gubfr qnlf: gura funyy gur fynlre erghea, naq pbzr hagb
uvf bja pvgl, naq hagb uvf bja ubhfr, hagb gur pvgl sebz jurapr ur
syrq.

20:7 Naq gurl nccbvagrq Xrqrfu va Tnyvyrr va zbhag Ancugnyv, naq
Furpurz va zbhag Rcuenvz, naq Xvewnguneon, juvpu vf Uroeba, va gur
zbhagnva bs Whqnu.

20:8 Naq ba gur bgure fvqr Wbeqna ol Wrevpub rnfgjneq, gurl nffvtarq
Ormre va gur jvyqrearff hcba gur cynva bhg bs gur gevor bs Erhora, naq
Enzbgu va Tvyrnq bhg bs gur gevor bs Tnq, naq Tbyna va Onfuna bhg bs
gur gevor bs Znanffru.

20:9 Gurfr jrer gur pvgvrf nccbvagrq sbe nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry,
naq sbe gur fgenatre gung fbwbheargu nzbat gurz, gung jubfbrire
xvyyrgu nal crefba ng hanjnerf zvtug syrr guvgure, naq abg qvr ol gur
unaq bs gur niratre bs oybbq, hagvy ur fgbbq orsber gur pbatertngvba.

21:1 Gura pnzr arne gur urnqf bs gur snguref bs gur Yrivgrf hagb
Ryrnmne gur cevrfg, naq hagb Wbfuhn gur fba bs Aha, naq hagb gur urnqf
bs gur snguref bs gur gevorf bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry; 21:2 Naq gurl
fcnxr hagb gurz ng Fuvybu va gur ynaq bs Pnanna, fnlvat, Gur YBEQ
pbzznaqrq ol gur unaq bs Zbfrf gb tvir hf pvgvrf gb qjryy va, jvgu gur
fhoheof gurerbs sbe bhe pnggyr.

21:3 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry tnir hagb gur Yrivgrf bhg bs gurve
vaurevgnapr, ng gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ, gurfr pvgvrf naq gurve
fhoheof.

21:4 Naq gur ybg pnzr bhg sbe gur snzvyvrf bs gur Xbunguvgrf: naq gur
puvyqera bs Nneba gur cevrfg, juvpu jrer bs gur Yrivgrf, unq ol ybg
bhg bs gur gevor bs Whqnu, naq bhg bs gur gevor bs Fvzrba, naq bhg bs
gur gevor bs Orawnzva, guvegrra pvgvrf.

21:5 Naq gur erfg bs gur puvyqera bs Xbungu unq ol ybg bhg bs gur
snzvyvrf bs gur gevor bs Rcuenvz, naq bhg bs gur gevor bs Qna, naq bhg
bs gur unys gevor bs Znanffru, gra pvgvrf.

21:6 Naq gur puvyqera bs Trefuba unq ol ybg bhg bs gur snzvyvrf bs gur
gevor bs Vffnpune, naq bhg bs gur gevor bs Nfure, naq bhg bs gur gevor
bs Ancugnyv, naq bhg bs gur unys gevor bs Znanffru va Onfuna, guvegrra
pvgvrf.

21:7 Gur puvyqera bs Zrenev ol gurve snzvyvrf unq bhg bs gur gevor bs
Erhora, naq bhg bs gur gevor bs Tnq, naq bhg bs gur gevor bs Mrohyha,
gjryir pvgvrf.

21:8 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry tnir ol ybg hagb gur Yrivgrf gurfr
pvgvrf jvgu gurve fhoheof, nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq ol gur unaq bs Zbfrf.

21:9 Naq gurl tnir bhg bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Whqnu, naq bhg
bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Fvzrba, gurfr pvgvrf juvpu ner urer
zragvbarq ol anzr.

21:10 Juvpu gur puvyqera bs Nneba, orvat bs gur snzvyvrf bs gur
Xbunguvgrf, jub jrer bs gur puvyqera bs Yriv, unq: sbe gurvef jnf gur
svefg ybg.

21:11 Naq gurl tnir gurz gur pvgl bs Neon gur sngure bs Nanx, juvpu
pvgl vf Uroeba, va gur uvyy pbhagel bs Whqnu, jvgu gur fhoheof gurerbs
ebhaq nobhg vg.

21:12 Ohg gur svryqf bs gur pvgl, naq gur ivyyntrf gurerbs, tnir gurl
gb Pnyro gur fba bs Wrcuhaaru sbe uvf cbffrffvba.

21:13 Guhf gurl tnir gb gur puvyqera bs Nneba gur cevrfg Uroeba jvgu
ure fhoheof, gb or n pvgl bs ershtr sbe gur fynlre; naq Yvoanu jvgu
ure fhoheof, 21:14 Naq Wnggve jvgu ure fhoheof, naq Rfugrzbn jvgu ure
fhoheof, 21:15 Naq Ubyba jvgu ure fhoheof, naq Qrove jvgu ure fhoheof,
21:16 Naq Nva jvgu ure fhoheof, naq Whggnu jvgu ure fhoheof, naq
Orgufurzrfu jvgu ure fhoheof; avar pvgvrf bhg bs gubfr gjb gevorf.

21:17 Naq bhg bs gur gevor bs Orawnzva, Tvorba jvgu ure fhoheof, Tron
jvgu ure fhoheof, 21:18 Nangubgu jvgu ure fhoheof, naq Nyzba jvgu ure
fhoheof; sbhe pvgvrf.

21:19 Nyy gur pvgvrf bs gur puvyqera bs Nneba, gur cevrfgf, jrer
guvegrra pvgvrf jvgu gurve fhoheof.

21:20 Naq gur snzvyvrf bs gur puvyqera bs Xbungu, gur Yrivgrf juvpu
erznvarq bs gur puvyqera bs Xbungu, rira gurl unq gur pvgvrf bs gurve
ybg bhg bs gur gevor bs Rcuenvz.

21:21 Sbe gurl tnir gurz Furpurz jvgu ure fhoheof va zbhag Rcuenvz, gb
or n pvgl bs ershtr sbe gur fynlre; naq Trmre jvgu ure fhoheof, 21:22
Naq Xvomnvz jvgu ure fhoheof, naq Orguubeba jvgu ure fhoheof; sbhe
pvgvrf.

21:23 Naq bhg bs gur gevor bs Qna, Rygrxru jvgu ure fhoheof, Tvoorguba
jvgu ure fhoheof, 21:24 Nvwnyba jvgu ure fhoheof, Tnguevzzba jvgu ure
fhoheof; sbhe pvgvrf.

21:25 Naq bhg bs gur unys gevor bs Znanffru, Gnanpu jvgu ure fhoheof,
naq Tnguevzzba jvgu ure fhoheof; gjb pvgvrf.

21:26 Nyy gur pvgvrf jrer gra jvgu gurve fhoheof sbe gur snzvyvrf bs
gur puvyqera bs Xbungu gung erznvarq.

21:27 Naq hagb gur puvyqera bs Trefuba, bs gur snzvyvrf bs gur
Yrivgrf, bhg bs gur bgure unys gevor bs Znanffru gurl tnir Tbyna va
Onfuna jvgu ure fhoheof, gb or n pvgl bs ershtr sbe gur fynlre; naq
Orrfugrenu jvgu ure fhoheof; gjb pvgvrf.

21:28 Naq bhg bs gur gevor bs Vffnpune, Xvfuba jvgu ure fhoheof,
Qnoneru jvgu ure fhoheof, 21:29 Wnezhgu jvgu ure fhoheof, Ratnaavz
jvgu ure fhoheof; sbhe pvgvrf.

21:30 Naq bhg bs gur gevor bs Nfure, Zvfuny jvgu ure fhoheof, Noqba
jvgu ure fhoheof, 21:31 Uryxngu jvgu ure fhoheof, naq Erubo jvgu ure
fhoheof; sbhe pvgvrf.

21:32 Naq bhg bs gur gevor bs Ancugnyv, Xrqrfu va Tnyvyrr jvgu ure
fhoheof, gb or n pvgl bs ershtr sbe gur fynlre; naq Unzzbguqbe jvgu
ure fhoheof, naq Xnegna jvgu ure fhoheof; guerr pvgvrf.

21:33 Nyy gur pvgvrf bs gur Trefubavgrf nppbeqvat gb gurve snzvyvrf
jrer guvegrra pvgvrf jvgu gurve fhoheof.

21:34 Naq hagb gur snzvyvrf bs gur puvyqera bs Zrenev, gur erfg bs gur
Yrivgrf, bhg bs gur gevor bs Mrohyha, Wbxarnz jvgu ure fhoheof, naq
Xnegnu jvgu ure fhoheof, 21:35 Qvzanu jvgu ure fhoheof, Anunyny jvgu
ure fhoheof; sbhe pvgvrf.

21:36 Naq bhg bs gur gevor bs Erhora, Ormre jvgu ure fhoheof, naq
Wnunmnu jvgu ure fhoheof, 21:37 Xrqrzbgu jvgu ure fhoheof, naq
Zrcunngu jvgu ure fhoheof; sbhe pvgvrf.

21:38 Naq bhg bs gur gevor bs Tnq, Enzbgu va Tvyrnq jvgu ure fhoheof,
gb or n pvgl bs ershtr sbe gur fynlre; naq Znunanvz jvgu ure fhoheof,
21:39 Urfuoba jvgu ure fhoheof, Wnmre jvgu ure fhoheof; sbhe pvgvrf va
nyy.

21:40 Fb nyy gur pvgvrf sbe gur puvyqera bs Zrenev ol gurve snzvyvrf,
juvpu jrer erznvavat bs gur snzvyvrf bs gur Yrivgrf, jrer ol gurve ybg
gjryir pvgvrf.

21:41 Nyy gur pvgvrf bs gur Yrivgrf jvguva gur cbffrffvba bs gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry jrer sbegl naq rvtug pvgvrf jvgu gurve fhoheof.

21:42 Gurfr pvgvrf jrer rirel bar jvgu gurve fhoheof ebhaq nobhg gurz:
guhf jrer nyy gurfr pvgvrf.

21:43 Naq gur YBEQ tnir hagb Vfenry nyy gur ynaq juvpu ur fjner gb
tvir hagb gurve snguref; naq gurl cbffrffrq vg, naq qjryg gurerva.

21:44 Naq gur YBEQ tnir gurz erfg ebhaq nobhg, nppbeqvat gb nyy gung
ur fjner hagb gurve snguref: naq gurer fgbbq abg n zna bs nyy gurve
rarzvrf orsber gurz; gur YBEQ qryvirerq nyy gurve rarzvrf vagb gurve
unaq.

21:45 Gurer snvyrq abg bhtug bs nal tbbq guvat juvpu gur YBEQ unq
fcbxra hagb gur ubhfr bs Vfenry; nyy pnzr gb cnff.

22:1 Gura Wbfuhn pnyyrq gur Erhoravgrf, naq gur Tnqvgrf, naq gur unys
gevor bs Znanffru, 22:2 Naq fnvq hagb gurz, Lr unir xrcg nyy gung
Zbfrf gur freinag bs gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq lbh, naq unir borlrq zl ibvpr
va nyy gung V pbzznaqrq lbh: 22:3 Lr unir abg yrsg lbhe oerguera gurfr
znal qnlf hagb guvf qnl, ohg unir xrcg gur punetr bs gur pbzznaqzrag
bs gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq.

22:4 Naq abj gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq ungu tvira erfg hagb lbhe oerguera, nf
ur cebzvfrq gurz: gurersber abj erghea lr, naq trg lbh hagb lbhe
gragf, naq hagb gur ynaq bs lbhe cbffrffvba, juvpu Zbfrf gur freinag
bs gur YBEQ tnir lbh ba gur bgure fvqr Wbeqna.

22:5 Ohg gnxr qvyvtrag urrq gb qb gur pbzznaqzrag naq gur ynj, juvpu
Zbfrf gur freinag bs gur YBEQ punetrq lbh, gb ybir gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq,
naq gb jnyx va nyy uvf jnlf, naq gb xrrc uvf pbzznaqzragf, naq gb
pyrnir hagb uvz, naq gb freir uvz jvgu nyy lbhe urneg naq jvgu nyy
lbhe fbhy.

22:6 Fb Wbfuhn oyrffrq gurz, naq frag gurz njnl: naq gurl jrag hagb
gurve gragf.

22:7 Abj gb gur bar unys bs gur gevor bs Znanffru Zbfrf unq tvira
cbffrffvba va Onfuna: ohg hagb gur bgure unys gurerbs tnir Wbfuhn
nzbat gurve oerguera ba guvf fvqr Wbeqna jrfgjneq. Naq jura Wbfuhn
frag gurz njnl nyfb hagb gurve gragf, gura ur oyrffrq gurz, 22:8 Naq
ur fcnxr hagb gurz, fnlvat, Erghea jvgu zhpu evpurf hagb lbhe gragf,
naq jvgu irel zhpu pnggyr, jvgu fvyire, naq jvgu tbyq, naq jvgu oenff,
naq jvgu veba, naq jvgu irel zhpu envzrag: qvivqr gur fcbvy bs lbhe
rarzvrf jvgu lbhe oerguera.

22:9 Naq gur puvyqera bs Erhora naq gur puvyqera bs Tnq naq gur unys
gevor bs Znanffru erghearq, naq qrcnegrq sebz gur puvyqera bs Vfenry
bhg bs Fuvybu, juvpu vf va gur ynaq bs Pnanna, gb tb hagb gur pbhagel
bs Tvyrnq, gb gur ynaq bs gurve cbffrffvba, jurerbs gurl jrer
cbffrffrq, nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ ol gur unaq bs Zbfrf.

22:10 Naq jura gurl pnzr hagb gur obeqref bs Wbeqna, gung ner va gur
ynaq bs Pnanna, gur puvyqera bs Erhora naq gur puvyqera bs Tnq naq gur
unys gevor bs Znanffru ohvyg gurer na nygne ol Wbeqna, n terng nygne
gb frr gb.

22:11 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry urneq fnl, Orubyq, gur puvyqera bs
Erhora naq gur puvyqera bs Tnq naq gur unys gevor bs Znanffru unir
ohvyg na nygne bire ntnvafg gur ynaq bs Pnanna, va gur obeqref bs
Wbeqna, ng gur cnffntr bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

22:12 Naq jura gur puvyqera bs Vfenry urneq bs vg, gur jubyr
pbatertngvba bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure ng
Fuvybu, gb tb hc gb jne ntnvafg gurz.

22:13 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry frag hagb gur puvyqera bs Erhora, naq
gb gur puvyqera bs Tnq, naq gb gur unys gevor bs Znanffru, vagb gur
ynaq bs Tvyrnq, Cuvarunf gur fba bs Ryrnmne gur cevrfg, 22:14 Naq jvgu
uvz gra cevaprf, bs rnpu puvrs ubhfr n cevapr guebhtubhg nyy gur
gevorf bs Vfenry; naq rnpu bar jnf na urnq bs gur ubhfr bs gurve
snguref nzbat gur gubhfnaqf bs Vfenry.

22:15 Naq gurl pnzr hagb gur puvyqera bs Erhora, naq gb gur puvyqera
bs Tnq, naq gb gur unys gevor bs Znanffru, hagb gur ynaq bs Tvyrnq,
naq gurl fcnxr jvgu gurz, fnlvat, 22:16 Guhf fnvgu gur jubyr
pbatertngvba bs gur YBEQ, Jung gerfcnff vf guvf gung lr unir pbzzvggrq
ntnvafg gur Tbq bs Vfenry, gb ghea njnl guvf qnl sebz sbyybjvat gur
YBEQ, va gung lr unir ohvyqrq lbh na nygne, gung lr zvtug erory guvf
qnl ntnvafg gur YBEQ?  22:17 Vf gur vavdhvgl bs Crbe gbb yvggyr sbe
hf, sebz juvpu jr ner abg pyrnafrq hagvy guvf qnl, nygubhtu gurer jnf
n cynthr va gur pbatertngvba bs gur YBEQ, 22:18 Ohg gung lr zhfg ghea
njnl guvf qnl sebz sbyybjvat gur YBEQ? naq vg jvyy or, frrvat lr erory
gb qnl ntnvafg gur YBEQ, gung gb zbeebj ur jvyy or jebgu jvgu gur
jubyr pbatertngvba bs Vfenry.

22:19 Abgjvgufgnaqvat, vs gur ynaq bs lbhe cbffrffvba or hapyrna, gura
cnff lr bire hagb gur ynaq bs gur cbffrffvba bs gur YBEQ, jurerva gur
YBEQ'f gnoreanpyr qjryyrgu, naq gnxr cbffrffvba nzbat hf: ohg erory
abg ntnvafg gur YBEQ, abe erory ntnvafg hf, va ohvyqvat lbh na nygne
orfvqr gur nygne bs gur YBEQ bhe Tbq.

22:20 Qvq abg Npuna gur fba bs Mrenu pbzzvg n gerfcnff va gur npphefrq
guvat, naq jengu sryy ba nyy gur pbatertngvba bs Vfenry? naq gung zna
crevfurq abg nybar va uvf vavdhvgl.

22:21 Gura gur puvyqera bs Erhora naq gur puvyqera bs Tnq naq gur unys
gevor bs Znanffru nafjrerq, naq fnvq hagb gur urnqf bs gur gubhfnaqf
bs Vfenry, 22:22 Gur YBEQ Tbq bs tbqf, gur YBEQ Tbq bs tbqf, ur
xabjrgu, naq Vfenry ur funyy xabj; vs vg or va eroryyvba, be vs va
genafterffvba ntnvafg gur YBEQ, (fnir hf abg guvf qnl,) 22:23 Gung jr
unir ohvyg hf na nygne gb ghea sebz sbyybjvat gur YBEQ, be vs gb bssre
gurerba oheag bssrevat be zrng bssrevat, be vs gb bssre crnpr
bssrevatf gurerba, yrg gur YBEQ uvzfrys erdhver vg; 22:24 Naq vs jr
unir abg engure qbar vg sbe srne bs guvf guvat, fnlvat, Va gvzr gb
pbzr lbhe puvyqera zvtug fcrnx hagb bhe puvyqera, fnlvat, Jung unir lr
gb qb jvgu gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry?  22:25 Sbe gur YBEQ ungu znqr
Wbeqna n obeqre orgjrra hf naq lbh, lr puvyqera bs Erhora naq puvyqera
bs Tnq; lr unir ab cneg va gur YBEQ: fb funyy lbhe puvyqera znxr bhe
puvyqera prnfr sebz srnevat gur YBEQ.

22:26 Gurersber jr fnvq, Yrg hf abj cercner gb ohvyq hf na nygne, abg
sbe oheag bssrevat, abe sbe fnpevsvpr: 22:27 Ohg gung vg znl or n
jvgarff orgjrra hf, naq lbh, naq bhe trarengvbaf nsgre hf, gung jr
zvtug qb gur freivpr bs gur YBEQ orsber uvz jvgu bhe oheag bssrevatf,
naq jvgu bhe fnpevsvprf, naq jvgu bhe crnpr bssrevatf; gung lbhe
puvyqera znl abg fnl gb bhe puvyqera va gvzr gb pbzr, Lr unir ab cneg
va gur YBEQ.

22:28 Gurersber fnvq jr, gung vg funyy or, jura gurl fubhyq fb fnl gb
hf be gb bhe trarengvbaf va gvzr gb pbzr, gung jr znl fnl ntnva,
Orubyq gur cnggrea bs gur nygne bs gur YBEQ, juvpu bhe snguref znqr,
abg sbe oheag bssrevatf, abe sbe fnpevsvprf; ohg vg vf n jvgarff
orgjrra hf naq lbh.

22:29 Tbq sbeovq gung jr fubhyq erory ntnvafg gur YBEQ, naq ghea guvf
qnl sebz sbyybjvat gur YBEQ, gb ohvyq na nygne sbe oheag bssrevatf,
sbe zrng bssrevatf, be sbe fnpevsvprf, orfvqr gur nygne bs gur YBEQ
bhe Tbq gung vf orsber uvf gnoreanpyr.

22:30 Naq jura Cuvarunf gur cevrfg, naq gur cevaprf bs gur
pbatertngvba naq urnqf bs gur gubhfnaqf bs Vfenry juvpu jrer jvgu uvz,
urneq gur jbeqf gung gur puvyqera bs Erhora naq gur puvyqera bs Tnq
naq gur puvyqera bs Znanffru fcnxr, vg cyrnfrq gurz.

22:31 Naq Cuvarunf gur fba bs Ryrnmne gur cevrfg fnvq hagb gur
puvyqera bs Erhora, naq gb gur puvyqera bs Tnq, naq gb gur puvyqera bs
Znanffru, Guvf qnl jr creprvir gung gur YBEQ vf nzbat hf, orpnhfr lr
unir abg pbzzvggrq guvf gerfcnff ntnvafg gur YBEQ: abj lr unir
qryvirerq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry bhg bs gur unaq bs gur YBEQ.

22:32 Naq Cuvarunf gur fba bs Ryrnmne gur cevrfg, naq gur cevaprf,
erghearq sebz gur puvyqera bs Erhora, naq sebz gur puvyqera bs Tnq,
bhg bs gur ynaq bs Tvyrnq, hagb gur ynaq bs Pnanna, gb gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, naq oebhtug gurz jbeq ntnva.

22:33 Naq gur guvat cyrnfrq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry; naq gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry oyrffrq Tbq, naq qvq abg vagraq gb tb hc ntnvafg gurz va
onggyr, gb qrfgebl gur ynaq jurerva gur puvyqera bs Erhora naq Tnq
qjryg.

22:34 Naq gur puvyqera bs Erhora naq gur puvyqera bs Tnq pnyyrq gur
nygne Rq: sbe vg funyy or n jvgarff orgjrra hf gung gur YBEQ vf Tbq.

23:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff n ybat gvzr nsgre gung gur YBEQ unq tvira
erfg hagb Vfenry sebz nyy gurve rarzvrf ebhaq nobhg, gung Wbfuhn jnkrq
byq naq fgevpxra va ntr.

23:2 Naq Wbfuhn pnyyrq sbe nyy Vfenry, naq sbe gurve ryqref, naq sbe
gurve urnqf, naq sbe gurve whqtrf, naq sbe gurve bssvpref, naq fnvq
hagb gurz, V nz byq naq fgevpxra va ntr: 23:3 Naq lr unir frra nyy
gung gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq ungu qbar hagb nyy gurfr angvbaf orpnhfr bs
lbh; sbe gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq vf ur gung ungu sbhtug sbe lbh.

23:4 Orubyq, V unir qvivqrq hagb lbh ol ybg gurfr angvbaf gung erznva,
gb or na vaurevgnapr sbe lbhe gevorf, sebz Wbeqna, jvgu nyy gur
angvbaf gung V unir phg bss, rira hagb gur terng frn jrfgjneq.

23:5 Naq gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, ur funyy rkcry gurz sebz orsber lbh, naq
qevir gurz sebz bhg bs lbhe fvtug; naq lr funyy cbffrff gurve ynaq, nf
gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq ungu cebzvfrq hagb lbh.

23:6 Or lr gurersber irel pbhentrbhf gb xrrc naq gb qb nyy gung vf
jevggra va gur obbx bs gur ynj bs Zbfrf, gung lr ghea abg nfvqr
gurersebz gb gur evtug unaq be gb gur yrsg; 23:7 Gung lr pbzr abg
nzbat gurfr angvbaf, gurfr gung erznva nzbat lbh; arvgure znxr zragvba
bs gur anzr bs gurve tbqf, abe pnhfr gb fjrne ol gurz, arvgure freir
gurz, abe obj lbhefryirf hagb gurz: 23:8 Ohg pyrnir hagb gur YBEQ lbhe
Tbq, nf lr unir qbar hagb guvf qnl.

23:9 Sbe gur YBEQ ungu qevira bhg sebz orsber lbh terng angvbaf naq
fgebat: ohg nf sbe lbh, ab zna ungu orra noyr gb fgnaq orsber lbh hagb
guvf qnl.

23:10 Bar zna bs lbh funyy punfr n gubhfnaq: sbe gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, ur
vg vf gung svtugrgu sbe lbh, nf ur ungu cebzvfrq lbh.

23:11 Gnxr tbbq urrq gurersber hagb lbhefryirf, gung lr ybir gur YBEQ
lbhe Tbq.

23:12 Ryfr vs lr qb va nal jvfr tb onpx, naq pyrnir hagb gur erzanag
bs gurfr angvbaf, rira gurfr gung erznva nzbat lbh, naq funyy znxr
zneevntrf jvgu gurz, naq tb va hagb gurz, naq gurl gb lbh: 23:13 Xabj
sbe n pregnvagl gung gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq jvyy ab zber qevir bhg nal bs
gurfr angvbaf sebz orsber lbh; ohg gurl funyy or fanerf naq gencf hagb
lbh, naq fpbhetrf va lbhe fvqrf, naq gubeaf va lbhe rlrf, hagvy lr
crevfu sebz bss guvf tbbq ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq ungu tvira lbh.

23:14 Naq, orubyq, guvf qnl V nz tbvat gur jnl bs nyy gur rnegu: naq
lr xabj va nyy lbhe urnegf naq va nyy lbhe fbhyf, gung abg bar guvat
ungu snvyrq bs nyy gur tbbq guvatf juvpu gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq fcnxr
pbapreavat lbh; nyy ner pbzr gb cnff hagb lbh, naq abg bar guvat ungu
snvyrq gurerbs.

23:15 Gurersber vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, gung nf nyy tbbq guvatf ner
pbzr hcba lbh, juvpu gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq cebzvfrq lbh; fb funyy gur YBEQ
oevat hcba lbh nyy rivy guvatf, hagvy ur unir qrfgeblrq lbh sebz bss
guvf tbbq ynaq juvpu gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq ungu tvira lbh.

23:16 Jura lr unir genafterffrq gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq,
juvpu ur pbzznaqrq lbh, naq unir tbar naq freirq bgure tbqf, naq objrq
lbhefryirf gb gurz; gura funyy gur natre bs gur YBEQ or xvaqyrq
ntnvafg lbh, naq lr funyy crevfu dhvpxyl sebz bss gur tbbq ynaq juvpu
ur ungu tvira hagb lbh.

24:1 Naq Wbfuhn tngurerq nyy gur gevorf bs Vfenry gb Furpurz, naq
pnyyrq sbe gur ryqref bs Vfenry, naq sbe gurve urnqf, naq sbe gurve
whqtrf, naq sbe gurve bssvpref; naq gurl cerfragrq gurzfryirf orsber
Tbq.

24:2 Naq Wbfuhn fnvq hagb nyy gur crbcyr, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ Tbq bs
Vfenry, Lbhe snguref qjryg ba gur bgure fvqr bs gur sybbq va byq gvzr,
rira Grenu, gur sngure bs Noenunz, naq gur sngure bs Anpube: naq gurl
freirq bgure tbqf.

24:3 Naq V gbbx lbhe sngure Noenunz sebz gur bgure fvqr bs gur sybbq,
naq yrq uvz guebhtubhg nyy gur ynaq bs Pnanna, naq zhygvcyvrq uvf
frrq, naq tnir uvz Vfnnp.

24:4 Naq V tnir hagb Vfnnp Wnpbo naq Rfnh: naq V tnir hagb Rfnh zbhag
Frve, gb cbffrff vg; ohg Wnpbo naq uvf puvyqera jrag qbja vagb Rtlcg.

24:5 V frag Zbfrf nyfb naq Nneba, naq V cynthrq Rtlcg, nppbeqvat gb
gung juvpu V qvq nzbat gurz: naq nsgrejneq V oebhtug lbh bhg.

24:6 Naq V oebhtug lbhe snguref bhg bs Rtlcg: naq lr pnzr hagb gur
frn; naq gur Rtlcgvnaf chefhrq nsgre lbhe snguref jvgu punevbgf naq
ubefrzra hagb gur Erq frn.

24:7 Naq jura gurl pevrq hagb gur YBEQ, ur chg qnexarff orgjrra lbh
naq gur Rtlcgvnaf, naq oebhtug gur frn hcba gurz, naq pbirerq gurz;
naq lbhe rlrf unir frra jung V unir qbar va Rtlcg: naq lr qjryg va gur
jvyqrearff n ybat frnfba.

24:8 Naq V oebhtug lbh vagb gur ynaq bs gur Nzbevgrf, juvpu qjryg ba
gur bgure fvqr Wbeqna; naq gurl sbhtug jvgu lbh: naq V tnir gurz vagb
lbhe unaq, gung lr zvtug cbffrff gurve ynaq; naq V qrfgeblrq gurz sebz
orsber lbh.

24:9 Gura Onynx gur fba bs Mvccbe, xvat bs Zbno, nebfr naq jneerq
ntnvafg Vfenry, naq frag naq pnyyrq Onynnz gur fba bs Orbe gb phefr
lbh: 24:10 Ohg V jbhyq abg urnexra hagb Onynnz; gurersber ur oyrffrq
lbh fgvyy: fb V qryvirerq lbh bhg bs uvf unaq.

24:11 Naq lbh jrag bire Wbeqna, naq pnzr hagb Wrevpub: naq gur zra bs
Wrevpub sbhtug ntnvafg lbh, gur Nzbevgrf, naq gur Crevmmvgrf, naq gur
Pnannavgrf, naq gur Uvggvgrf, naq gur Tvetnfuvgrf, gur Uvivgrf, naq
gur Wrohfvgrf; naq V qryvirerq gurz vagb lbhe unaq.

24:12 Naq V frag gur ubearg orsber lbh, juvpu qenir gurz bhg sebz
orsber lbh, rira gur gjb xvatf bs gur Nzbevgrf; ohg abg jvgu gul
fjbeq, abe jvgu gul obj.

24:13 Naq V unir tvira lbh n ynaq sbe juvpu lr qvq abg ynobhe, naq
pvgvrf juvpu lr ohvyg abg, naq lr qjryy va gurz; bs gur ivarlneqf naq
byvirlneqf juvpu lr cynagrq abg qb lr rng.

24:14 Abj gurersber srne gur YBEQ, naq freir uvz va fvaprevgl naq va
gehgu: naq chg njnl gur tbqf juvpu lbhe snguref freirq ba gur bgure
fvqr bs gur sybbq, naq va Rtlcg; naq freir lr gur YBEQ.

24:15 Naq vs vg frrz rivy hagb lbh gb freir gur YBEQ, pubbfr lbh guvf
qnl jubz lr jvyy freir; jurgure gur tbqf juvpu lbhe snguref freirq
gung jrer ba gur bgure fvqr bs gur sybbq, be gur tbqf bs gur Nzbevgrf,
va jubfr ynaq lr qjryy: ohg nf sbe zr naq zl ubhfr, jr jvyy freir gur
YBEQ.

24:16 Naq gur crbcyr nafjrerq naq fnvq, Tbq sbeovq gung jr fubhyq
sbefnxr gur YBEQ, gb freir bgure tbqf; 24:17 Sbe gur YBEQ bhe Tbq, ur
vg vf gung oebhtug hf hc naq bhe snguref bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg,
sebz gur ubhfr bs obaqntr, naq juvpu qvq gubfr terng fvtaf va bhe
fvtug, naq cerfreirq hf va nyy gur jnl jurerva jr jrag, naq nzbat nyy
gur crbcyr guebhtu jubz jr cnffrq: 24:18 Naq gur YBEQ qenir bhg sebz
orsber hf nyy gur crbcyr, rira gur Nzbevgrf juvpu qjryg va gur ynaq:
gurersber jvyy jr nyfb freir gur YBEQ; sbe ur vf bhe Tbq.

24:19 Naq Wbfuhn fnvq hagb gur crbcyr, Lr pnaabg freir gur YBEQ: sbe
ur vf na ubyl Tbq; ur vf n wrnybhf Tbq; ur jvyy abg sbetvir lbhe
genafterffvbaf abe lbhe fvaf.

24:20 Vs lr sbefnxr gur YBEQ, naq freir fgenatr tbqf, gura ur jvyy
ghea naq qb lbh uheg, naq pbafhzr lbh, nsgre gung ur ungu qbar lbh
tbbq.

24:21 Naq gur crbcyr fnvq hagb Wbfuhn, Anl; ohg jr jvyy freir gur
YBEQ.

24:22 Naq Wbfuhn fnvq hagb gur crbcyr, Lr ner jvgarffrf ntnvafg
lbhefryirf gung lr unir pubfra lbh gur YBEQ, gb freir uvz. Naq gurl
fnvq, Jr ner jvgarffrf.

24:23 Abj gurersber chg njnl, fnvq ur, gur fgenatr tbqf juvpu ner
nzbat lbh, naq vapyvar lbhe urneg hagb gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry.

24:24 Naq gur crbcyr fnvq hagb Wbfuhn, Gur YBEQ bhe Tbq jvyy jr freir,
naq uvf ibvpr jvyy jr borl.

24:25 Fb Wbfuhn znqr n pbiranag jvgu gur crbcyr gung qnl, naq frg gurz
n fgnghgr naq na beqvanapr va Furpurz.

24:26 Naq Wbfuhn jebgr gurfr jbeqf va gur obbx bs gur ynj bs Tbq, naq
gbbx n terng fgbar, naq frg vg hc gurer haqre na bnx, gung jnf ol gur
fnapghnel bs gur YBEQ.

24:27 Naq Wbfuhn fnvq hagb nyy gur crbcyr, Orubyq, guvf fgbar funyy or
n jvgarff hagb hf; sbe vg ungu urneq nyy gur jbeqf bs gur YBEQ juvpu
ur fcnxr hagb hf: vg funyy or gurersber n jvgarff hagb lbh, yrfg lr
qral lbhe Tbq.

24:28 Fb Wbfuhn yrg gur crbcyr qrcneg, rirel zna hagb uvf vaurevgnapr.

24:29 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre gurfr guvatf, gung Wbfuhn gur fba bs
Aha, gur freinag bs gur YBEQ, qvrq, orvat na uhaqerq naq gra lrnef
byq.

24:30 Naq gurl ohevrq uvz va gur obeqre bs uvf vaurevgnapr va
Gvzangufrenu, juvpu vf va zbhag Rcuenvz, ba gur abegu fvqr bs gur uvyy
bs Tnnfu.

24:31 Naq Vfenry freirq gur YBEQ nyy gur qnlf bs Wbfuhn, naq nyy gur
qnlf bs gur ryqref gung bireyvirq Wbfuhn, naq juvpu unq xabja nyy gur
jbexf bs gur YBEQ, gung ur unq qbar sbe Vfenry.

24:32 Naq gur obarf bs Wbfrcu, juvpu gur puvyqera bs Vfenry oebhtug hc
bhg bs Rtlcg, ohevrq gurl va Furpurz, va n cnepry bs tebhaq juvpu
Wnpbo obhtug bs gur fbaf bs Unzbe gur sngure bs Furpurz sbe na uhaqerq
cvrprf bs fvyire: naq vg orpnzr gur vaurevgnapr bs gur puvyqera bs
Wbfrcu.

24:33 Naq Ryrnmne gur fba bs Nneba qvrq; naq gurl ohevrq uvz va n uvyy
gung cregnvarq gb Cuvarunf uvf fba, juvpu jnf tvira uvz va zbhag
Rcuenvz.




Gur Obbx bs Whqtrf


1:1 Abj nsgre gur qrngu bs Wbfuhn vg pnzr gb cnff, gung gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry nfxrq gur YBEQ, fnlvat, Jub funyy tb hc sbe hf ntnvafg gur
Pnannavgrf svefg, gb svtug ntnvafg gurz?  1:2 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq, Whqnu
funyy tb hc: orubyq, V unir qryvirerq gur ynaq vagb uvf unaq.

1:3 Naq Whqnu fnvq hagb Fvzrba uvf oebgure, Pbzr hc jvgu zr vagb zl
ybg, gung jr znl svtug ntnvafg gur Pnannavgrf; naq V yvxrjvfr jvyy tb
jvgu gurr vagb gul ybg. Fb Fvzrba jrag jvgu uvz.

1:4 Naq Whqnu jrag hc; naq gur YBEQ qryvirerq gur Pnannavgrf naq gur
Crevmmvgrf vagb gurve unaq: naq gurl fyrj bs gurz va Ormrx gra
gubhfnaq zra.

1:5 Naq gurl sbhaq Nqbavormrx va Ormrx: naq gurl sbhtug ntnvafg uvz,
naq gurl fyrj gur Pnannavgrf naq gur Crevmmvgrf.

1:6 Ohg Nqbavormrx syrq; naq gurl chefhrq nsgre uvz, naq pnhtug uvz,
naq phg bss uvf guhzof naq uvf terng gbrf.

1:7 Naq Nqbavormrx fnvq, Guerrfpber naq gra xvatf, univat gurve guhzof
naq gurve terng gbrf phg bss, tngurerq gurve zrng haqre zl gnoyr: nf V
unir qbar, fb Tbq ungu erdhvgrq zr. Naq gurl oebhtug uvz gb Wrehfnyrz,
naq gurer ur qvrq.

1:8 Abj gur puvyqera bs Whqnu unq sbhtug ntnvafg Wrehfnyrz, naq unq
gnxra vg, naq fzvggra vg jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq, naq frg gur pvgl
ba sver.

1:9 Naq nsgrejneq gur puvyqera bs Whqnu jrag qbja gb svtug ntnvafg gur
Pnannavgrf, gung qjryg va gur zbhagnva, naq va gur fbhgu, naq va gur
inyyrl.

1:10 Naq Whqnu jrag ntnvafg gur Pnannavgrf gung qjryg va Uroeba: (abj
gur anzr bs Uroeba orsber jnf Xvewnguneon:) naq gurl fyrj Furfunv, naq
Nuvzna, naq Gnyznv.

1:11 Naq sebz gurapr ur jrag ntnvafg gur vaunovgnagf bs Qrove: naq gur
anzr bs Qrove orsber jnf Xvewngufrcure: 1:12 Naq Pnyro fnvq, Ur gung
fzvgrgu Xvewngufrcure, naq gnxrgu vg, gb uvz jvyy V tvir Npufnu zl
qnhtugre gb jvsr.

1:13 Naq Bguavry gur fba bs Xranm, Pnyro'f lbhatre oebgure, gbbx vg:
naq ur tnir uvz Npufnu uvf qnhtugre gb jvsr.

1:14 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura fur pnzr gb uvz, gung fur zbirq uvz gb
nfx bs ure sngure n svryq: naq fur yvtugrq sebz bss ure nff; naq Pnyro
fnvq hagb ure, Jung jvyg gubh?  1:15 Naq fur fnvq hagb uvz, Tvir zr n
oyrffvat: sbe gubh unfg tvira zr n fbhgu ynaq; tvir zr nyfb fcevatf bs
jngre. Naq Pnyro tnir ure gur hccre fcevatf naq gur argure fcevatf.

1:16 Naq gur puvyqera bs gur Xravgr, Zbfrf' sngure va ynj, jrag hc bhg
bs gur pvgl bs cnyz gerrf jvgu gur puvyqera bs Whqnu vagb gur
jvyqrearff bs Whqnu, juvpu yvrgu va gur fbhgu bs Nenq; naq gurl jrag
naq qjryg nzbat gur crbcyr.

1:17 Naq Whqnu jrag jvgu Fvzrba uvf oebgure, naq gurl fyrj gur
Pnannavgrf gung vaunovgrq Mrcungu, naq hggreyl qrfgeblrq vg. Naq gur
anzr bs gur pvgl jnf pnyyrq Ubeznu.

1:18 Nyfb Whqnu gbbx Tnmn jvgu gur pbnfg gurerbs, naq Nfxryba jvgu gur
pbnfg gurerbs, naq Rxeba jvgu gur pbnfg gurerbs.

1:19 Naq gur YBEQ jnf jvgu Whqnu; naq ur qenir bhg gur vaunovgnagf bs
gur zbhagnva; ohg pbhyq abg qevir bhg gur vaunovgnagf bs gur inyyrl,
orpnhfr gurl unq punevbgf bs veba.

1:20 Naq gurl tnir Uroeba hagb Pnyro, nf Zbfrf fnvq: naq ur rkcryyrq
gurapr gur guerr fbaf bs Nanx.

1:21 Naq gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva qvq abg qevir bhg gur Wrohfvgrf gung
vaunovgrq Wrehfnyrz; ohg gur Wrohfvgrf qjryy jvgu gur puvyqera bs
Orawnzva va Wrehfnyrz hagb guvf qnl.

1:22 Naq gur ubhfr bs Wbfrcu, gurl nyfb jrag hc ntnvafg Orgury: naq
gur YBEQ jnf jvgu gurz.

1:23 Naq gur ubhfr bs Wbfrcu frag gb qrfpel Orgury. (Abj gur anzr bs
gur pvgl orsber jnf Yhm.)  1:24 Naq gur fcvrf fnj n zna pbzr sbegu bhg
bs gur pvgl, naq gurl fnvq hagb uvz, Furj hf, jr cenl gurr, gur
ragenapr vagb gur pvgl, naq jr jvyy furj gurr zrepl.

1:25 Naq jura ur furjrq gurz gur ragenapr vagb gur pvgl, gurl fzbgr
gur pvgl jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq; ohg gurl yrg tb gur zna naq nyy
uvf snzvyl.

1:26 Naq gur zna jrag vagb gur ynaq bs gur Uvggvgrf, naq ohvyg n pvgl,
naq pnyyrq gur anzr gurerbs Yhm: juvpu vf gur anzr gurerbs hagb guvf
qnl.

1:27 Arvgure qvq Znanffru qevir bhg gur vaunovgnagf bs Orgufurna naq
ure gbjaf, abe Gnnanpu naq ure gbjaf, abe gur vaunovgnagf bs Qbe naq
ure gbjaf, abe gur vaunovgnagf bs Voyrnz naq ure gbjaf, abe gur
vaunovgnagf bs Zrtvqqb naq ure gbjaf: ohg gur Pnannavgrf jbhyq qjryy
va gung ynaq.

1:28 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Vfenry jnf fgebat, gung gurl chg gur
Pnannavgrf gb gevohgr, naq qvq abg hggreyl qevir gurz bhg.

1:29 Arvgure qvq Rcuenvz qevir bhg gur Pnannavgrf gung qjryg va Trmre;
ohg gur Pnannavgrf qjryg va Trmre nzbat gurz.

1:30 Arvgure qvq Mrohyha qevir bhg gur vaunovgnagf bs Xvgeba, abe gur
vaunovgnagf bs Anunyby; ohg gur Pnannavgrf qjryg nzbat gurz, naq
orpnzr gevohgnevrf.

1:31 Arvgure qvq Nfure qevir bhg gur vaunovgnagf bs Nppub, abe gur
vaunovgnagf bs Mvqba, abe bs Nuyno, abe bs Npumvo, abe bs Uryonu, abe
bs Ncuvx, abe bs Erubo: 1:32 Ohg gur Nfurevgrf qjryg nzbat gur
Pnannavgrf, gur vaunovgnagf bs gur ynaq: sbe gurl qvq abg qevir gurz
bhg.

1:33 Arvgure qvq Ancugnyv qevir bhg gur vaunovgnagf bs Orgufurzrfu,
abe gur vaunovgnagf bs Orgunangu; ohg ur qjryg nzbat gur Pnannavgrf,
gur vaunovgnagf bs gur ynaq: arireguryrff gur vaunovgnagf bs
Orgufurzrfu naq bs Orgunangu orpnzr gevohgnevrf hagb gurz.

1:34 Naq gur Nzbevgrf sbeprq gur puvyqera bs Qna vagb gur zbhagnva:
sbe gurl jbhyq abg fhssre gurz gb pbzr qbja gb gur inyyrl: 1:35 Ohg
gur Nzbevgrf jbhyq qjryy va zbhag Urerf va Nvwnyba, naq va Funnyovz:
lrg gur unaq bs gur ubhfr bs Wbfrcu cerinvyrq, fb gung gurl orpnzr
gevohgnevrf.

1:36 Naq gur pbnfg bs gur Nzbevgrf jnf sebz gur tbvat hc gb Nxenoovz,
sebz gur ebpx, naq hcjneq.

2:1 Naq na natry bs gur YBEQ pnzr hc sebz Tvytny gb Obpuvz, naq fnvq,
V znqr lbh gb tb hc bhg bs Rtlcg, naq unir oebhtug lbh hagb gur ynaq
juvpu V fjner hagb lbhe snguref; naq V fnvq, V jvyy arire oernx zl
pbiranag jvgu lbh.

2:2 Naq lr funyy znxr ab yrnthr jvgu gur vaunovgnagf bs guvf ynaq; lr
funyy guebj qbja gurve nygnef: ohg lr unir abg borlrq zl ibvpr: jul
unir lr qbar guvf?  2:3 Jurersber V nyfb fnvq, V jvyy abg qevir gurz
bhg sebz orsber lbh; ohg gurl funyy or nf gubeaf va lbhe fvqrf, naq
gurve tbqf funyy or n faner hagb lbh.

2:4 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur natry bs gur YBEQ fcnxr gurfr jbeqf
hagb nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, gung gur crbcyr yvsgrq hc gurve
ibvpr, naq jrcg.

2:5 Naq gurl pnyyrq gur anzr bs gung cynpr Obpuvz: naq gurl fnpevsvprq
gurer hagb gur YBEQ.

2:6 Naq jura Wbfuhn unq yrg gur crbcyr tb, gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jrag
rirel zna hagb uvf vaurevgnapr gb cbffrff gur ynaq.

2:7 Naq gur crbcyr freirq gur YBEQ nyy gur qnlf bs Wbfuhn, naq nyy gur
qnlf bs gur ryqref gung bhgyvirq Wbfuhn, jub unq frra nyy gur terng
jbexf bs gur YBEQ, gung ur qvq sbe Vfenry.

2:8 Naq Wbfuhn gur fba bs Aha, gur freinag bs gur YBEQ, qvrq, orvat na
uhaqerq naq gra lrnef byq.

2:9 Naq gurl ohevrq uvz va gur obeqre bs uvf vaurevgnapr va
Gvzanguurerf, va gur zbhag bs Rcuenvz, ba gur abegu fvqr bs gur uvyy
Tnnfu.

2:10 Naq nyfb nyy gung trarengvba jrer tngurerq hagb gurve snguref:
naq gurer nebfr nabgure trarengvba nsgre gurz, juvpu xarj abg gur
YBEQ, abe lrg gur jbexf juvpu ur unq qbar sbe Vfenry.

2:11 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, naq
freirq Onnyvz: 2:12 Naq gurl sbefbbx gur YBEQ Tbq bs gurve snguref,
juvpu oebhtug gurz bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, naq sbyybjrq bgure tbqf,
bs gur tbqf bs gur crbcyr gung jrer ebhaq nobhg gurz, naq objrq
gurzfryirf hagb gurz, naq cebibxrq gur YBEQ gb natre.

2:13 Naq gurl sbefbbx gur YBEQ, naq freirq Onny naq Nfugnebgu.

2:14 Naq gur natre bs gur YBEQ jnf ubg ntnvafg Vfenry, naq ur
qryvirerq gurz vagb gur unaqf bs fcbvyref gung fcbvyrq gurz, naq ur
fbyq gurz vagb gur unaqf bs gurve rarzvrf ebhaq nobhg, fb gung gurl
pbhyq abg nal ybatre fgnaq orsber gurve rarzvrf.

2:15 Juvgurefbrire gurl jrag bhg, gur unaq bs gur YBEQ jnf ntnvafg
gurz sbe rivy, nf gur YBEQ unq fnvq, naq nf gur YBEQ unq fjbea hagb
gurz: naq gurl jrer terngyl qvfgerffrq.

2:16 Arireguryrff gur YBEQ envfrq hc whqtrf, juvpu qryvirerq gurz bhg
bs gur unaq bs gubfr gung fcbvyrq gurz.

2:17 Naq lrg gurl jbhyq abg urnexra hagb gurve whqtrf, ohg gurl jrag n
jubevat nsgre bgure tbqf, naq objrq gurzfryirf hagb gurz: gurl ghearq
dhvpxyl bhg bs gur jnl juvpu gurve snguref jnyxrq va, borlvat gur
pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ; ohg gurl qvq abg fb.

2:18 Naq jura gur YBEQ envfrq gurz hc whqtrf, gura gur YBEQ jnf jvgu
gur whqtr, naq qryvirerq gurz bhg bs gur unaq bs gurve rarzvrf nyy gur
qnlf bs gur whqtr: sbe vg ercragrq gur YBEQ orpnhfr bs gurve tebnavatf
ol ernfba bs gurz gung bccerffrq gurz naq irkrq gurz.

2:19 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur whqtr jnf qrnq, gung gurl erghearq,
naq pbeehcgrq gurzfryirf zber guna gurve snguref, va sbyybjvat bgure
tbqf gb freir gurz, naq gb obj qbja hagb gurz; gurl prnfrq abg sebz
gurve bja qbvatf, abe sebz gurve fghoobea jnl.

2:20 Naq gur natre bs gur YBEQ jnf ubg ntnvafg Vfenry; naq ur fnvq,
Orpnhfr gung guvf crbcyr ungu genafterffrq zl pbiranag juvpu V
pbzznaqrq gurve snguref, naq unir abg urnexrarq hagb zl ibvpr; 2:21 V
nyfb jvyy abg uraprsbegu qevir bhg nal sebz orsber gurz bs gur angvbaf
juvpu Wbfuhn yrsg jura ur qvrq: 2:22 Gung guebhtu gurz V znl cebir
Vfenry, jurgure gurl jvyy xrrc gur jnl bs gur YBEQ gb jnyx gurerva, nf
gurve snguref qvq xrrc vg, be abg.

2:23 Gurersber gur YBEQ yrsg gubfr angvbaf, jvgubhg qevivat gurz bhg
unfgvyl; arvgure qryvirerq ur gurz vagb gur unaq bs Wbfuhn.

3:1 Abj gurfr ner gur angvbaf juvpu gur YBEQ yrsg, gb cebir Vfenry ol
gurz, rira nf znal bs Vfenry nf unq abg xabja nyy gur jnef bs Pnanna;
3:2 Bayl gung gur trarengvbaf bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry zvtug xabj, gb
grnpu gurz jne, ng gur yrnfg fhpu nf orsber xarj abguvat gurerbs; 3:3
Anzryl, svir ybeqf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf, naq nyy gur Pnannavgrf, naq gur
Fvqbavnaf, naq gur Uvivgrf gung qjryg va zbhag Yronaba, sebz zbhag
Onnyurezba hagb gur ragrevat va bs Unzngu.

3:4 Naq gurl jrer gb cebir Vfenry ol gurz, gb xabj jurgure gurl jbhyq
urnexra hagb gur pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ, juvpu ur pbzznaqrq gurve
snguref ol gur unaq bs Zbfrf.

3:5 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qjryg nzbat gur Pnannavgrf, Uvggvgrf,
naq Nzbevgrf, naq Crevmmvgrf, naq Uvivgrf, naq Wrohfvgrf: 3:6 Naq gurl
gbbx gurve qnhtugref gb or gurve jvirf, naq tnir gurve qnhtugref gb
gurve fbaf, naq freirq gurve tbqf.

3:7 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, naq
sbetng gur YBEQ gurve Tbq, naq freirq Onnyvz naq gur tebirf.

3:8 Gurersber gur natre bs gur YBEQ jnf ubg ntnvafg Vfenry, naq ur
fbyq gurz vagb gur unaq bs Puhfunaevfungunvz xvat bs Zrfbcbgnzvn: naq
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry freirq Puhfunaevfungunvz rvtug lrnef.

3:9 Naq jura gur puvyqera bs Vfenry pevrq hagb gur YBEQ, gur YBEQ
envfrq hc n qryvirere gb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, jub qryvirerq gurz,
rira Bguavry gur fba bs Xranm, Pnyro'f lbhatre oebgure.

3:10 Naq gur Fcvevg bs gur YBEQ pnzr hcba uvz, naq ur whqtrq Vfenry,
naq jrag bhg gb jne: naq gur YBEQ qryvirerq Puhfunaevfungunvz xvat bs
Zrfbcbgnzvn vagb uvf unaq; naq uvf unaq cerinvyrq ntnvafg
Puhfunaevfungunvz.

3:11 Naq gur ynaq unq erfg sbegl lrnef. Naq Bguavry gur fba bs Xranm
qvrq.

3:12 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq rivy ntnva va gur fvtug bs gur
YBEQ: naq gur YBEQ fgeratgurarq Rtyba gur xvat bs Zbno ntnvafg Vfenry,
orpnhfr gurl unq qbar rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ.

3:13 Naq ur tngurerq hagb uvz gur puvyqera bs Nzzba naq Nznyrx, naq
jrag naq fzbgr Vfenry, naq cbffrffrq gur pvgl bs cnyz gerrf.

3:14 Fb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry freirq Rtyba gur xvat bs Zbno rvtugrra
lrnef.

3:15 Ohg jura gur puvyqera bs Vfenry pevrq hagb gur YBEQ, gur YBEQ
envfrq gurz hc n qryvirere, Ruhq gur fba bs Tren, n Orawnzvgr, n zna
yrsgunaqrq: naq ol uvz gur puvyqera bs Vfenry frag n cerfrag hagb
Rtyba gur xvat bs Zbno.

3:16 Ohg Ruhq znqr uvz n qnttre juvpu unq gjb rqtrf, bs n phovg
yratgu; naq ur qvq tveq vg haqre uvf envzrag hcba uvf evtug guvtu.

3:17 Naq ur oebhtug gur cerfrag hagb Rtyba xvat bs Zbno: naq Rtyba jnf
n irel sng zna.

3:18 Naq jura ur unq znqr na raq gb bssre gur cerfrag, ur frag njnl
gur crbcyr gung oner gur cerfrag.

3:19 Ohg ur uvzfrys ghearq ntnva sebz gur dhneevrf gung jrer ol
Tvytny, naq fnvq, V unir n frperg reenaq hagb gurr, B xvat: jub fnvq,
Xrrc fvyrapr. Naq nyy gung fgbbq ol uvz jrag bhg sebz uvz.

3:20 Naq Ruhq pnzr hagb uvz; naq ur jnf fvggvat va n fhzzre cneybhe,
juvpu ur unq sbe uvzfrys nybar. Naq Ruhq fnvq, V unir n zrffntr sebz
Tbq hagb gurr.

Naq ur nebfr bhg bs uvf frng.

3:21 Naq Ruhq chg sbegu uvf yrsg unaq, naq gbbx gur qnttre sebz uvf
evtug guvtu, naq guehfg vg vagb uvf oryyl: 3:22 Naq gur unsg nyfb jrag
va nsgre gur oynqr; naq gur sng pybfrq hcba gur oynqr, fb gung ur
pbhyq abg qenj gur qnttre bhg bs uvf oryyl; naq gur qveg pnzr bhg.

3:23 Gura Ruhq jrag sbegu guebhtu gur cbepu, naq fuhg gur qbbef bs gur
cneybhe hcba uvz, naq ybpxrq gurz.

3:24 Jura ur jnf tbar bhg, uvf freinagf pnzr; naq jura gurl fnj gung,
orubyq, gur qbbef bs gur cneybhe jrer ybpxrq, gurl fnvq, Fheryl ur
pbirergu uvf srrg va uvf fhzzre punzore.

3:25 Naq gurl gneevrq gvyy gurl jrer nfunzrq: naq, orubyq, ur bcrarq
abg gur qbbef bs gur cneybhe; gurersber gurl gbbx n xrl, naq bcrarq
gurz: naq, orubyq, gurve ybeq jnf snyyra qbja qrnq ba gur rnegu.

3:26 Naq Ruhq rfpncrq juvyr gurl gneevrq, naq cnffrq orlbaq gur
dhneevrf, naq rfpncrq hagb Frvengu.

3:27 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura ur jnf pbzr, gung ur oyrj n gehzcrg va
gur zbhagnva bs Rcuenvz, naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jrag qbja jvgu uvz
sebz gur zbhag, naq ur orsber gurz.

3:28 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Sbyybj nsgre zr: sbe gur YBEQ ungu
qryvirerq lbhe rarzvrf gur Zbnovgrf vagb lbhe unaq. Naq gurl jrag qbja
nsgre uvz, naq gbbx gur sbeqf bs Wbeqna gbjneq Zbno, naq fhssrerq abg
n zna gb cnff bire.

3:29 Naq gurl fyrj bs Zbno ng gung gvzr nobhg gra gubhfnaq zra, nyy
yhfgl, naq nyy zra bs inybhe; naq gurer rfpncrq abg n zna.

3:30 Fb Zbno jnf fhoqhrq gung qnl haqre gur unaq bs Vfenry. Naq gur
ynaq unq erfg sbhefpber lrnef.

3:31 Naq nsgre uvz jnf Funztne gur fba bs Nangu, juvpu fyrj bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf fvk uhaqerq zra jvgu na bk tbnq: naq ur nyfb qryvirerq
Vfenry.

4:1 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry ntnva qvq rivy va gur fvtug bs gur
YBEQ, jura Ruhq jnf qrnq.

4:2 Naq gur YBEQ fbyq gurz vagb gur unaq bs Wnova xvat bs Pnanna, gung
ervtarq va Unmbe; gur pncgnva bs jubfr ubfg jnf Fvfren, juvpu qjryg va
Unebfurgu bs gur Tragvyrf.

4:3 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry pevrq hagb gur YBEQ: sbe ur unq avar
uhaqerq punevbgf bs veba; naq gjragl lrnef ur zvtugvyl bccerffrq gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry.

4:4 Naq Qrobenu, n cebcurgrff, gur jvsr bs Yncvqbgu, fur whqtrq Vfenry
ng gung gvzr.

4:5 Naq fur qjryg haqre gur cnyz gerr bs Qrobenu orgjrra Enznu naq
Orgury va zbhag Rcuenvz: naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry pnzr hc gb ure sbe
whqtzrag.

4:6 Naq fur frag naq pnyyrq Onenx gur fba bs Novabnz bhg bs
Xrqrfuancugnyv, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Ungu abg gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry
pbzznaqrq, fnlvat, Tb naq qenj gbjneq zbhag Gnobe, naq gnxr jvgu gurr
gra gubhfnaq zra bs gur puvyqera bs Ancugnyv naq bs gur puvyqera bs
Mrohyha?  4:7 Naq V jvyy qenj hagb gurr gb gur evire Xvfuba Fvfren,
gur pncgnva bs Wnova'f nezl, jvgu uvf punevbgf naq uvf zhygvghqr; naq
V jvyy qryvire uvz vagb guvar unaq.

4:8 Naq Onenx fnvq hagb ure, Vs gubh jvyg tb jvgu zr, gura V jvyy tb:
ohg vs gubh jvyg abg tb jvgu zr, gura V jvyy abg tb.

4:9 Naq fur fnvq, V jvyy fheryl tb jvgu gurr: abgjvgufgnaqvat gur
wbhearl gung gubh gnxrfg funyy abg or sbe guvar ubabhe; sbe gur YBEQ
funyy fryy Fvfren vagb gur unaq bs n jbzna. Naq Qrobenu nebfr, naq
jrag jvgu Onenx gb Xrqrfu.

4:10 Naq Onenx pnyyrq Mrohyha naq Ancugnyv gb Xrqrfu; naq ur jrag hc
jvgu gra gubhfnaq zra ng uvf srrg: naq Qrobenu jrag hc jvgu uvz.

4:11 Abj Urore gur Xravgr, juvpu jnf bs gur puvyqera bs Ubono gur
sngure va ynj bs Zbfrf, unq frirerq uvzfrys sebz gur Xravgrf, naq
cvgpurq uvf grag hagb gur cynva bs Mnnanvz, juvpu vf ol Xrqrfu.

4:12 Naq gurl furjrq Fvfren gung Onenx gur fba bs Novabnz jnf tbar hc
gb zbhag Gnobe.

4:13 Naq Fvfren tngurerq gbtrgure nyy uvf punevbgf, rira avar uhaqerq
punevbgf bs veba, naq nyy gur crbcyr gung jrer jvgu uvz, sebz
Unebfurgu bs gur Tragvyrf hagb gur evire bs Xvfuba.

4:14 Naq Qrobenu fnvq hagb Onenx, Hc; sbe guvf vf gur qnl va juvpu gur
YBEQ ungu qryvirerq Fvfren vagb guvar unaq: vf abg gur YBEQ tbar bhg
orsber gurr? Fb Onenx jrag qbja sebz zbhag Gnobe, naq gra gubhfnaq zra
nsgre uvz.

4:15 Naq gur YBEQ qvfpbzsvgrq Fvfren, naq nyy uvf punevbgf, naq nyy
uvf ubfg, jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq orsber Onenx; fb gung Fvfren
yvtugrq qbja bss uvf punevbg, naq syrq njnl ba uvf srrg.

4:16 Ohg Onenx chefhrq nsgre gur punevbgf, naq nsgre gur ubfg, hagb
Unebfurgu bs gur Tragvyrf: naq nyy gur ubfg bs Fvfren sryy hcba gur
rqtr bs gur fjbeq; naq gurer jnf abg n zna yrsg.

4:17 Ubjorvg Fvfren syrq njnl ba uvf srrg gb gur grag bs Wnry gur jvsr
bs Urore gur Xravgr: sbe gurer jnf crnpr orgjrra Wnova gur xvat bs
Unmbe naq gur ubhfr bs Urore gur Xravgr.

4:18 Naq Wnry jrag bhg gb zrrg Fvfren, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Ghea va, zl
ybeq, ghea va gb zr; srne abg. Naq jura ur unq ghearq va hagb ure vagb
gur grag, fur pbirerq uvz jvgu n znagyr.

4:19 Naq ur fnvq hagb ure, Tvir zr, V cenl gurr, n yvggyr jngre gb
qevax; sbe V nz guvefgl. Naq fur bcrarq n obggyr bs zvyx, naq tnir uvz
qevax, naq pbirerq uvz.

4:20 Ntnva ur fnvq hagb ure, Fgnaq va gur qbbe bs gur grag, naq vg
funyy or, jura nal zna qbgu pbzr naq radhver bs gurr, naq fnl, Vf
gurer nal zna urer? gung gubh funyg fnl, Ab.

4:21 Gura Wnry Urore'f jvsr gbbx n anvy bs gur grag, naq gbbx na
unzzre va ure unaq, naq jrag fbsgyl hagb uvz, naq fzbgr gur anvy vagb
uvf grzcyrf, naq snfgrarq vg vagb gur tebhaq: sbe ur jnf snfg nfyrrc
naq jrnel. Fb ur qvrq.

4:22 Naq, orubyq, nf Onenx chefhrq Fvfren, Wnry pnzr bhg gb zrrg uvz,
naq fnvq hagb uvz, Pbzr, naq V jvyy furj gurr gur zna jubz gubh
frrxrfg. Naq jura ur pnzr vagb ure grag, orubyq, Fvfren ynl qrnq, naq
gur anvy jnf va uvf grzcyrf.

4:23 Fb Tbq fhoqhrq ba gung qnl Wnova gur xvat bs Pnanna orsber gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry.

4:24 Naq gur unaq bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry cebfcrerq, naq cerinvyrq
ntnvafg Wnova gur xvat bs Pnanna, hagvy gurl unq qrfgeblrq Wnova xvat
bs Pnanna.

5:1 Gura fnat Qrobenu naq Onenx gur fba bs Novabnz ba gung qnl,
fnlvat, 5:2 Cenvfr lr gur YBEQ sbe gur niratvat bs Vfenry, jura gur
crbcyr jvyyvatyl bssrerq gurzfryirf.

5:3 Urne, B lr xvatf; tvir rne, B lr cevaprf; V, rira V, jvyy fvat
hagb gur YBEQ; V jvyy fvat cenvfr gb gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry.

5:4 YBEQ, jura gubh jragrfg bhg bs Frve, jura gubh znepurqfg bhg bs
gur svryq bs Rqbz, gur rnegu gerzoyrq, naq gur urniraf qebccrq, gur
pybhqf nyfb qebccrq jngre.

5:5 Gur zbhagnvaf zrygrq sebz orsber gur YBEQ, rira gung Fvanv sebz
orsber gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry.

5:6 Va gur qnlf bs Funztne gur fba bs Nangu, va gur qnlf bs Wnry, gur
uvtujnlf jrer habpphcvrq, naq gur geniryyref jnyxrq guebhtu oljnlf.

5:7 Gur vaunovgnagf bs gur ivyyntrf prnfrq, gurl prnfrq va Vfenry,
hagvy gung V Qrobenu nebfr, gung V nebfr n zbgure va Vfenry.

5:8 Gurl pubfr arj tbqf; gura jnf jne va gur tngrf: jnf gurer n fuvryq
be fcrne frra nzbat sbegl gubhfnaq va Vfenry?  5:9 Zl urneg vf gbjneq
gur tbireabef bs Vfenry, gung bssrerq gurzfryirf jvyyvatyl nzbat gur
crbcyr. Oyrff lr gur YBEQ.

5:10 Fcrnx, lr gung evqr ba juvgr nffrf, lr gung fvg va whqtzrag, naq
jnyx ol gur jnl.

5:11 Gurl gung ner qryvirerq sebz gur abvfr bs nepuref va gur cynprf
bs qenjvat jngre, gurer funyy gurl erurnefr gur evtugrbhf npgf bs gur
YBEQ, rira gur evtugrbhf npgf gbjneq gur vaunovgnagf bs uvf ivyyntrf
va Vfenry: gura funyy gur crbcyr bs gur YBEQ tb qbja gb gur tngrf.

5:12 Njnxr, njnxr, Qrobenu: njnxr, njnxr, hggre n fbat: nevfr, Onenx,
naq yrnq gul pncgvivgl pncgvir, gubh fba bs Novabnz.

5:13 Gura ur znqr uvz gung erznvargu unir qbzvavba bire gur aboyrf
nzbat gur crbcyr: gur YBEQ znqr zr unir qbzvavba bire gur zvtugl.

5:14 Bhg bs Rcuenvz jnf gurer n ebbg bs gurz ntnvafg Nznyrx; nsgre
gurr, Orawnzva, nzbat gul crbcyr; bhg bs Znpuve pnzr qbja tbireabef,
naq bhg bs Mrohyha gurl gung unaqyr gur cra bs gur jevgre.

5:15 Naq gur cevaprf bs Vffnpune jrer jvgu Qrobenu; rira Vffnpune, naq
nyfb Onenx: ur jnf frag ba sbbg vagb gur inyyrl. Sbe gur qvivfvbaf bs
Erhora gurer jrer terng gubhtugf bs urneg.

5:16 Jul nobqrfg gubh nzbat gur furrcsbyqf, gb urne gur oyrngvatf bs
gur sybpxf? Sbe gur qvivfvbaf bs Erhora gurer jrer terng frnepuvatf bs
urneg.

5:17 Tvyrnq nobqr orlbaq Wbeqna: naq jul qvq Qna erznva va fuvcf?
Nfure pbagvahrq ba gur frn fuber, naq nobqr va uvf oernpurf.

5:18 Mrohyha naq Ancugnyv jrer n crbcyr gung wrbcneqrq gurve yvirf
hagb gur qrngu va gur uvtu cynprf bs gur svryq.

5:19 Gur xvatf pnzr naq sbhtug, gura sbhtug gur xvatf bs Pnanna va
Gnnanpu ol gur jngref bs Zrtvqqb; gurl gbbx ab tnva bs zbarl.

5:20 Gurl sbhtug sebz urnira; gur fgnef va gurve pbhefrf sbhtug
ntnvafg Fvfren.

5:21 Gur evire bs Xvfuba fjrcg gurz njnl, gung napvrag evire, gur
evire Xvfuba. B zl fbhy, gubh unfg gebqqra qbja fgeratgu.

5:22 Gura jrer gur ubefrubbsf oebxra ol gur zrnaf bs gur cenafvatf,
gur cenafvatf bs gurve zvtugl barf.

5:23 Phefr lr Zrebm, fnvq gur natry bs gur YBEQ, phefr lr ovggreyl gur
vaunovgnagf gurerbs; orpnhfr gurl pnzr abg gb gur uryc bs gur YBEQ, gb
gur uryc bs gur YBEQ ntnvafg gur zvtugl.

5:24 Oyrffrq nobir jbzra funyy Wnry gur jvsr bs Urore gur Xravgr or,
oyrffrq funyy fur or nobir jbzra va gur grag.

5:25 Ur nfxrq jngre, naq fur tnir uvz zvyx; fur oebhtug sbegu ohggre
va n ybeqyl qvfu.

5:26 Fur chg ure unaq gb gur anvy, naq ure evtug unaq gb gur jbexzra'f
unzzre; naq jvgu gur unzzre fur fzbgr Fvfren, fur fzbgr bss uvf urnq,
jura fur unq cvreprq naq fgevpxra guebhtu uvf grzcyrf.

5:27 Ng ure srrg ur objrq, ur sryy, ur ynl qbja: ng ure srrg ur objrq,
ur sryy: jurer ur objrq, gurer ur sryy qbja qrnq.

5:28 Gur zbgure bs Fvfren ybbxrq bhg ng n jvaqbj, naq pevrq guebhtu
gur ynggvpr, Jul vf uvf punevbg fb ybat va pbzvat? jul gneel gur
jurryf bs uvf punevbgf?  5:29 Ure jvfr ynqvrf nafjrerq ure, lrn, fur
erghearq nafjre gb urefrys, 5:30 Unir gurl abg fcrq? unir gurl abg
qvivqrq gur cerl; gb rirel zna n qnzfry be gjb; gb Fvfren n cerl bs
qviref pbybhef, n cerl bs qviref pbybhef bs arrqyrjbex, bs qviref
pbybhef bs arrqyrjbex ba obgu fvqrf, zrrg sbe gur arpxf bs gurz gung
gnxr gur fcbvy?  5:31 Fb yrg nyy guvar rarzvrf crevfu, B YBEQ: ohg yrg
gurz gung ybir uvz or nf gur fha jura ur tbrgu sbegu va uvf zvtug. Naq
gur ynaq unq erfg sbegl lrnef.

6:1 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ: naq
gur YBEQ qryvirerq gurz vagb gur unaq bs Zvqvna frira lrnef.

6:2 Naq gur unaq bs Zvqvna cerinvyrq ntnvafg Vfenry: naq orpnhfr bs
gur Zvqvnavgrf gur puvyqera bs Vfenry znqr gurz gur qraf juvpu ner va
gur zbhagnvaf, naq pnirf, naq fgebat ubyqf.

6:3 Naq fb vg jnf, jura Vfenry unq fbja, gung gur Zvqvnavgrf pnzr hc,
naq gur Nznyrxvgrf, naq gur puvyqera bs gur rnfg, rira gurl pnzr hc
ntnvafg gurz; 6:4 Naq gurl rapnzcrq ntnvafg gurz, naq qrfgeblrq gur
vapernfr bs gur rnegu, gvyy gubh pbzr hagb Tnmn, naq yrsg ab
fhfgranapr sbe Vfenry, arvgure furrc, abe bk, abe nff.

6:5 Sbe gurl pnzr hc jvgu gurve pnggyr naq gurve gragf, naq gurl pnzr
nf tenffubccref sbe zhygvghqr; sbe obgu gurl naq gurve pnzryf jrer
jvgubhg ahzore: naq gurl ragrerq vagb gur ynaq gb qrfgebl vg.

6:6 Naq Vfenry jnf terngyl vzcbirevfurq orpnhfr bs gur Zvqvnavgrf; naq
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry pevrq hagb gur YBEQ.

6:7 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur puvyqera bs Vfenry pevrq hagb gur
YBEQ orpnhfr bs gur Zvqvnavgrf, 6:8 Gung gur YBEQ frag n cebcurg hagb
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, juvpu fnvq hagb gurz, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ Tbq
bs Vfenry, V oebhtug lbh hc sebz Rtlcg, naq oebhtug lbh sbegu bhg bs
gur ubhfr bs obaqntr; 6:9 Naq V qryvirerq lbh bhg bs gur unaq bs gur
Rtlcgvnaf, naq bhg bs gur unaq bs nyy gung bccerffrq lbh, naq qenir
gurz bhg sebz orsber lbh, naq tnir lbh gurve ynaq; 6:10 Naq V fnvq
hagb lbh, V nz gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq; srne abg gur tbqf bs gur Nzbevgrf,
va jubfr ynaq lr qjryy: ohg lr unir abg borlrq zl ibvpr.

6:11 Naq gurer pnzr na natry bs gur YBEQ, naq fng haqre na bnx juvpu
jnf va Bcuenu, gung cregnvarq hagb Wbnfu gur Novrmevgr: naq uvf fba
Tvqrba guerfurq jurng ol gur jvarcerff, gb uvqr vg sebz gur
Zvqvnavgrf.

6:12 Naq gur natry bs gur YBEQ nccrnerq hagb uvz, naq fnvq hagb uvz,
Gur YBEQ vf jvgu gurr, gubh zvtugl zna bs inybhe.

6:13 Naq Tvqrba fnvq hagb uvz, Bu zl Ybeq, vs gur YBEQ or jvgu hf, jul
gura vf nyy guvf orsnyyra hf? naq jurer or nyy uvf zvenpyrf juvpu bhe
snguref gbyq hf bs, fnlvat, Qvq abg gur YBEQ oevat hf hc sebz Rtlcg?
ohg abj gur YBEQ ungu sbefnxra hf, naq qryvirerq hf vagb gur unaqf bs
gur Zvqvnavgrf.

6:14 Naq gur YBEQ ybbxrq hcba uvz, naq fnvq, Tb va guvf gul zvtug, naq
gubh funyg fnir Vfenry sebz gur unaq bs gur Zvqvnavgrf: unir abg V
frag gurr?  6:15 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Bu zl Ybeq, jurerjvgu funyy V
fnir Vfenry?  orubyq, zl snzvyl vf cbbe va Znanffru, naq V nz gur
yrnfg va zl sngure'f ubhfr.

6:16 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb uvz, Fheryl V jvyy or jvgu gurr, naq gubh
funyg fzvgr gur Zvqvnavgrf nf bar zna.

6:17 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Vs abj V unir sbhaq tenpr va gul fvtug,
gura furj zr n fvta gung gubh gnyxrfg jvgu zr.

6:18 Qrcneg abg urapr, V cenl gurr, hagvy V pbzr hagb gurr, naq oevat
sbegu zl cerfrag, naq frg vg orsber gurr. Naq ur fnvq, V jvyy gneel
hagvy gubh pbzr ntnva.

6:19 Naq Tvqrba jrag va, naq znqr ernql n xvq, naq hayrnirarq pnxrf bs
na rcunu bs sybhe: gur syrfu ur chg va n onfxrg, naq ur chg gur oebgu
va n cbg, naq oebhtug vg bhg hagb uvz haqre gur bnx, naq cerfragrq vg.

6:20 Naq gur natry bs Tbq fnvq hagb uvz, Gnxr gur syrfu naq gur
hayrnirarq pnxrf, naq ynl gurz hcba guvf ebpx, naq cbhe bhg gur oebgu.
Naq ur qvq fb.

6:21 Gura gur natry bs gur YBEQ chg sbegu gur raq bs gur fgnss gung
jnf va uvf unaq, naq gbhpurq gur syrfu naq gur hayrnirarq pnxrf; naq
gurer ebfr hc sver bhg bs gur ebpx, naq pbafhzrq gur syrfu naq gur
hayrnirarq pnxrf. Gura gur natry bs gur YBEQ qrcnegrq bhg bs uvf
fvtug.

6:22 Naq jura Tvqrba creprvirq gung ur jnf na natry bs gur YBEQ,
Tvqrba fnvq, Nynf, B YBEQ Tbq! sbe orpnhfr V unir frra na natry bs gur
YBEQ snpr gb snpr.

6:23 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb uvz, Crnpr or hagb gurr; srne abg: gubh
funyg abg qvr.

6:24 Gura Tvqrba ohvyg na nygne gurer hagb gur YBEQ, naq pnyyrq vg
Wrubinufunybz: hagb guvf qnl vg vf lrg va Bcuenu bs gur Novrmevgrf.

6:25 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff gur fnzr avtug, gung gur YBEQ fnvq hagb uvz,
Gnxr gul sngure'f lbhat ohyybpx, rira gur frpbaq ohyybpx bs frira
lrnef byq, naq guebj qbja gur nygne bs Onny gung gul sngure ungu, naq
phg qbja gur tebir gung vf ol vg: 6:26 Naq ohvyq na nygne hagb gur
YBEQ gul Tbq hcba gur gbc bs guvf ebpx, va gur beqrerq cynpr, naq gnxr
gur frpbaq ohyybpx, naq bssre n oheag fnpevsvpr jvgu gur jbbq bs gur
tebir juvpu gubh funyg phg qbja.

6:27 Gura Tvqrba gbbx gra zra bs uvf freinagf, naq qvq nf gur YBEQ unq
fnvq hagb uvz: naq fb vg jnf, orpnhfr ur srnerq uvf sngure'f
ubhfrubyq, naq gur zra bs gur pvgl, gung ur pbhyq abg qb vg ol qnl,
gung ur qvq vg ol avtug.

6:28 Naq jura gur zra bs gur pvgl nebfr rneyl va gur zbeavat, orubyq,
gur nygne bs Onny jnf pnfg qbja, naq gur tebir jnf phg qbja gung jnf
ol vg, naq gur frpbaq ohyybpx jnf bssrerq hcba gur nygne gung jnf
ohvyg.

6:29 Naq gurl fnvq bar gb nabgure, Jub ungu qbar guvf guvat? Naq jura
gurl radhverq naq nfxrq, gurl fnvq, Tvqrba gur fba bs Wbnfu ungu qbar
guvf guvat.

6:30 Gura gur zra bs gur pvgl fnvq hagb Wbnfu, Oevat bhg gul fba, gung
ur znl qvr: orpnhfr ur ungu pnfg qbja gur nygne bs Onny, naq orpnhfr
ur ungu phg qbja gur tebir gung jnf ol vg.

6:31 Naq Wbnfu fnvq hagb nyy gung fgbbq ntnvafg uvz, Jvyy lr cyrnq sbe
Onny? jvyy lr fnir uvz? ur gung jvyy cyrnq sbe uvz, yrg uvz or chg gb
qrngu juvyfg vg vf lrg zbeavat: vs ur or n tbq, yrg uvz cyrnq sbe
uvzfrys, orpnhfr bar ungu pnfg qbja uvf nygne.

6:32 Gurersber ba gung qnl ur pnyyrq uvz Wrehoonny, fnlvat, Yrg Onny
cyrnq ntnvafg uvz, orpnhfr ur ungu guebja qbja uvf nygne.

6:33 Gura nyy gur Zvqvnavgrf naq gur Nznyrxvgrf naq gur puvyqera bs
gur rnfg jrer tngurerq gbtrgure, naq jrag bire, naq cvgpurq va gur
inyyrl bs Wrmerry.

6:34 Ohg gur Fcvevg bs gur YBEQ pnzr hcba Tvqrba, naq ur oyrj n
gehzcrg; naq Novrmre jnf tngurerq nsgre uvz.

6:35 Naq ur frag zrffratref guebhtubhg nyy Znanffru; jub nyfb jnf
tngurerq nsgre uvz: naq ur frag zrffratref hagb Nfure, naq hagb
Mrohyha, naq hagb Ancugnyv; naq gurl pnzr hc gb zrrg gurz.

6:36 Naq Tvqrba fnvq hagb Tbq, Vs gubh jvyg fnir Vfenry ol zvar unaq,
nf gubh unfg fnvq, 6:37 Orubyq, V jvyy chg n syrrpr bs jbby va gur
sybbe; naq vs gur qrj or ba gur syrrpr bayl, naq vg or qel hcba nyy
gur rnegu orfvqr, gura funyy V xabj gung gubh jvyg fnir Vfenry ol zvar
unaq, nf gubh unfg fnvq.

6:38 Naq vg jnf fb: sbe ur ebfr hc rneyl ba gur zbeebj, naq guehfg gur
syrrpr gbtrgure, naq jevatrq gur qrj bhg bs gur syrrpr, n objy shyy bs
jngre.

6:39 Naq Tvqrba fnvq hagb Tbq, Yrg abg guvar natre or ubg ntnvafg zr,
naq V jvyy fcrnx ohg guvf bapr: yrg zr cebir, V cenl gurr, ohg guvf
bapr jvgu gur syrrpr; yrg vg abj or qel bayl hcba gur syrrpr, naq hcba
nyy gur tebhaq yrg gurer or qrj.

6:40 Naq Tbq qvq fb gung avtug: sbe vg jnf qel hcba gur syrrpr bayl,
naq gurer jnf qrj ba nyy gur tebhaq.

7:1 Gura Wrehoonny, jub vf Tvqrba, naq nyy gur crbcyr gung jrer jvgu
uvz, ebfr hc rneyl, naq cvgpurq orfvqr gur jryy bs Unebq: fb gung gur
ubfg bs gur Zvqvnavgrf jrer ba gur abegu fvqr bs gurz, ol gur uvyy bs
Zberu, va gur inyyrl.

7:2 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Tvqrba, Gur crbcyr gung ner jvgu gurr ner
gbb znal sbe zr gb tvir gur Zvqvnavgrf vagb gurve unaqf, yrfg Vfenry
inhag gurzfryirf ntnvafg zr, fnlvat, Zvar bja unaq ungu fnirq zr.

7:3 Abj gurersber tb gb, cebpynvz va gur rnef bs gur crbcyr, fnlvat,
Jubfbrire vf srneshy naq nsenvq, yrg uvz erghea naq qrcneg rneyl sebz
zbhag Tvyrnq. Naq gurer erghearq bs gur crbcyr gjragl naq gjb
gubhfnaq; naq gurer erznvarq gra gubhfnaq.

7:4 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Tvqrba, Gur crbcyr ner lrg gbb znal; oevat
gurz qbja hagb gur jngre, naq V jvyy gel gurz sbe gurr gurer: naq vg
funyy or, gung bs jubz V fnl hagb gurr, Guvf funyy tb jvgu gurr, gur
fnzr funyy tb jvgu gurr; naq bs jubzfbrire V fnl hagb gurr, Guvf funyy
abg tb jvgu gurr, gur fnzr funyy abg tb.

7:5 Fb ur oebhtug qbja gur crbcyr hagb gur jngre: naq gur YBEQ fnvq
hagb Tvqrba, Rirel bar gung ynccrgu bs gur jngre jvgu uvf gbathr, nf n
qbt ynccrgu, uvz funyg gubh frg ol uvzfrys; yvxrjvfr rirel bar gung
objrgu qbja hcba uvf xarrf gb qevax.

7:6 Naq gur ahzore bs gurz gung ynccrq, chggvat gurve unaq gb gurve
zbhgu, jrer guerr uhaqerq zra: ohg nyy gur erfg bs gur crbcyr objrq
qbja hcba gurve xarrf gb qevax jngre.

7:7 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Tvqrba, Ol gur guerr uhaqerq zra gung
ynccrq jvyy V fnir lbh, naq qryvire gur Zvqvnavgrf vagb guvar unaq:
naq yrg nyy gur bgure crbcyr tb rirel zna hagb uvf cynpr.

7:8 Fb gur crbcyr gbbx ivpghnyf va gurve unaq, naq gurve gehzcrgf: naq
ur frag nyy gur erfg bs Vfenry rirel zna hagb uvf grag, naq ergnvarq
gubfr guerr uhaqerq zra: naq gur ubfg bs Zvqvna jnf orarngu uvz va gur
inyyrl.

7:9 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff gur fnzr avtug, gung gur YBEQ fnvq hagb uvz,
Nevfr, trg gurr qbja hagb gur ubfg; sbe V unir qryvirerq vg vagb guvar
unaq.

7:10 Ohg vs gubh srne gb tb qbja, tb gubh jvgu Cuhenu gul freinag qbja
gb gur ubfg: 7:11 Naq gubh funyg urne jung gurl fnl; naq nsgrejneq
funyy guvar unaqf or fgeratgurarq gb tb qbja hagb gur ubfg. Gura jrag
ur qbja jvgu Cuhenu uvf freinag hagb gur bhgfvqr bs gur nezrq zra gung
jrer va gur ubfg.

7:12 Naq gur Zvqvnavgrf naq gur Nznyrxvgrf naq nyy gur puvyqera bs gur
rnfg ynl nybat va gur inyyrl yvxr tenffubccref sbe zhygvghqr; naq
gurve pnzryf jrer jvgubhg ahzore, nf gur fnaq ol gur frn fvqr sbe
zhygvghqr.

7:13 Naq jura Tvqrba jnf pbzr, orubyq, gurer jnf n zna gung gbyq n
qernz hagb uvf sryybj, naq fnvq, Orubyq, V qernzrq n qernz, naq, yb, n
pnxr bs oneyrl oernq ghzoyrq vagb gur ubfg bs Zvqvna, naq pnzr hagb n
grag, naq fzbgr vg gung vg sryy, naq bireghearq vg, gung gur grag ynl
nybat.

7:14 Naq uvf sryybj nafjrerq naq fnvq, Guvf vf abguvat ryfr fnir gur
fjbeq bs Tvqrba gur fba bs Wbnfu, n zna bs Vfenry: sbe vagb uvf unaq
ungu Tbq qryvirerq Zvqvna, naq nyy gur ubfg.

7:15 Naq vg jnf fb, jura Tvqrba urneq gur gryyvat bs gur qernz, naq
gur vagrecergngvba gurerbs, gung ur jbefuvccrq, naq erghearq vagb gur
ubfg bs Vfenry, naq fnvq, Nevfr; sbe gur YBEQ ungu qryvirerq vagb lbhe
unaq gur ubfg bs Zvqvna.

7:16 Naq ur qvivqrq gur guerr uhaqerq zra vagb guerr pbzcnavrf, naq ur
chg n gehzcrg va rirel zna'f unaq, jvgu rzcgl cvgpuref, naq ynzcf
jvguva gur cvgpuref.

7:17 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Ybbx ba zr, naq qb yvxrjvfr: naq, orubyq,
jura V pbzr gb gur bhgfvqr bs gur pnzc, vg funyy or gung, nf V qb, fb
funyy lr qb.

7:18 Jura V oybj jvgu n gehzcrg, V naq nyy gung ner jvgu zr, gura oybj
lr gur gehzcrgf nyfb ba rirel fvqr bs nyy gur pnzc, naq fnl, Gur fjbeq
bs gur YBEQ, naq bs Tvqrba.

7:19 Fb Tvqrba, naq gur uhaqerq zra gung jrer jvgu uvz, pnzr hagb gur
bhgfvqr bs gur pnzc va gur ortvaavat bs gur zvqqyr jngpu; naq gurl unq
ohg arjyl frg gur jngpu: naq gurl oyrj gur gehzcrgf, naq oenxr gur
cvgpuref gung jrer va gurve unaqf.

7:20 Naq gur guerr pbzcnavrf oyrj gur gehzcrgf, naq oenxr gur
cvgpuref, naq uryq gur ynzcf va gurve yrsg unaqf, naq gur gehzcrgf va
gurve evtug unaqf gb oybj jvguny: naq gurl pevrq, Gur fjbeq bs gur
YBEQ, naq bs Tvqrba.

7:21 Naq gurl fgbbq rirel zna va uvf cynpr ebhaq nobhg gur pnzc; naq
nyy gur ubfg ena, naq pevrq, naq syrq.

7:22 Naq gur guerr uhaqerq oyrj gur gehzcrgf, naq gur YBEQ frg rirel
zna'f fjbeq ntnvafg uvf sryybj, rira guebhtubhg nyy gur ubfg: naq gur
ubfg syrq gb Orgufuvggnu va Mrerengu, naq gb gur obeqre bs
Noryzrubynu, hagb Gnoongu.

7:23 Naq gur zra bs Vfenry tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure bhg bs
Ancugnyv, naq bhg bs Nfure, naq bhg bs nyy Znanffru, naq chefhrq nsgre
gur Zvqvnavgrf.

7:24 Naq Tvqrba frag zrffratref guebhtubhg nyy zbhag Rcuenvz, fnlvat,
pbzr qbja ntnvafg gur Zvqvnavgrf, naq gnxr orsber gurz gur jngref hagb
Orguonenu naq Wbeqna. Gura nyy gur zra bs Rcuenvz tngurerq gurzfryirf
gbtrgure, naq gbbx gur jngref hagb Orguonenu naq Wbeqna.

7:25 Naq gurl gbbx gjb cevaprf bs gur Zvqvnavgrf, Bero naq Mrro; naq
gurl fyrj Bero hcba gur ebpx Bero, naq Mrro gurl fyrj ng gur jvarcerff
bs Mrro, naq chefhrq Zvqvna, naq oebhtug gur urnqf bs Bero naq Mrro gb
Tvqrba ba gur bgure fvqr Wbeqna.

8:1 Naq gur zra bs Rcuenvz fnvq hagb uvz, Jul unfg gubh freirq hf
guhf, gung gubh pnyyrqfg hf abg, jura gubh jragrfg gb svtug jvgu gur
Zvqvnavgrf?  Naq gurl qvq puvqr jvgu uvz funecyl.

8:2 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Jung unir V qbar abj va pbzcnevfba bs lbh?
Vf abg gur tyrnavat bs gur tencrf bs Rcuenvz orggre guna gur ivagntr
bs Novrmre?  8:3 Tbq ungu qryvirerq vagb lbhe unaqf gur cevaprf bs
Zvqvna, Bero naq Mrro: naq jung jnf V noyr gb qb va pbzcnevfba bs lbh?
Gura gurve natre jnf nongrq gbjneq uvz, jura ur unq fnvq gung.

8:4 Naq Tvqrba pnzr gb Wbeqna, naq cnffrq bire, ur, naq gur guerr
uhaqerq zra gung jrer jvgu uvz, snvag, lrg chefhvat gurz.

8:5 Naq ur fnvq hagb gur zra bs Fhppbgu, Tvir, V cenl lbh, ybnirf bs
oernq hagb gur crbcyr gung sbyybj zr; sbe gurl or snvag, naq V nz
chefhvat nsgre Mronu naq Mnyzhaan, xvatf bs Zvqvna.

8:6 Naq gur cevaprf bs Fhppbgu fnvq, Ner gur unaqf bs Mronu naq
Mnyzhaan abj va guvar unaq, gung jr fubhyq tvir oernq hagb guvar nezl?
8:7 Naq Tvqrba fnvq, Gurersber jura gur YBEQ ungu qryvirerq Mronu naq
Mnyzhaan vagb zvar unaq, gura V jvyy grne lbhe syrfu jvgu gur gubeaf
bs gur jvyqrearff naq jvgu oevref.

8:8 Naq ur jrag hc gurapr gb Crahry, naq fcnxr hagb gurz yvxrjvfr: naq
gur zra bs Crahry nafjrerq uvz nf gur zra bs Fhppbgu unq nafjrerq uvz.

8:9 Naq ur fcnxr nyfb hagb gur zra bs Crahry, fnlvat, Jura V pbzr
ntnva va crnpr, V jvyy oernx qbja guvf gbjre.

8:10 Abj Mronu naq Mnyzhaan jrer va Xnexbe, naq gurve ubfgf jvgu gurz,
nobhg svsgrra gubhfnaq zra, nyy gung jrer yrsg bs nyy gur ubfgf bs gur
puvyqera bs gur rnfg: sbe gurer sryy na uhaqerq naq gjragl gubhfnaq
zra gung qerj fjbeq.

8:11 Naq Tvqrba jrag hc ol gur jnl bs gurz gung qjryg va gragf ba gur
rnfg bs Abonu naq Wbtorunu, naq fzbgr gur ubfg; sbe gur ubfg jnf
frpher.

8:12 Naq jura Mronu naq Mnyzhaan syrq, ur chefhrq nsgre gurz, naq gbbx
gur gjb xvatf bs Zvqvna, Mronu naq Mnyzhaan, naq qvfpbzsvgrq nyy gur
ubfg.

8:13 Naq Tvqrba gur fba bs Wbnfu erghearq sebz onggyr orsber gur fha
jnf hc, 8:14 Naq pnhtug n lbhat zna bs gur zra bs Fhppbgu, naq
radhverq bs uvz: naq ur qrfpevorq hagb uvz gur cevaprf bs Fhppbgu, naq
gur ryqref gurerbs, rira guerrfpber naq friragrra zra.

8:15 Naq ur pnzr hagb gur zra bs Fhppbgu, naq fnvq, Orubyq Mronu naq
Mnyzhaan, jvgu jubz lr qvq hcoenvq zr, fnlvat, Ner gur unaqf bs Mronu
naq Mnyzhaan abj va guvar unaq, gung jr fubhyq tvir oernq hagb gul zra
gung ner jrnel?  8:16 Naq ur gbbx gur ryqref bs gur pvgl, naq gubeaf
bs gur jvyqrearff naq oevref, naq jvgu gurz ur gnhtug gur zra bs
Fhppbgu.

8:17 Naq ur orng qbja gur gbjre bs Crahry, naq fyrj gur zra bs gur
pvgl.

8:18 Gura fnvq ur hagb Mronu naq Mnyzhaan, Jung znaare bs zra jrer
gurl jubz lr fyrj ng Gnobe? Naq gurl nafjrerq, Nf gubh neg, fb jrer
gurl; rnpu bar erfrzoyrq gur puvyqera bs n xvat.

8:19 Naq ur fnvq, Gurl jrer zl oerguera, rira gur fbaf bs zl zbgure:
nf gur YBEQ yvirgu, vs lr unq fnirq gurz nyvir, V jbhyq abg fynl lbh.

8:20 Naq ur fnvq hagb Wrgure uvf svefgobea, Hc, naq fynl gurz. Ohg gur
lbhgu qerj abg uvf fjbeq: sbe ur srnerq, orpnhfr ur jnf lrg n lbhgu.

8:21 Gura Mronu naq Mnyzhaan fnvq, Evfr gubh, naq snyy hcba hf: sbe nf
gur zna vf, fb vf uvf fgeratgu. Naq Tvqrba nebfr, naq fyrj Mronu naq
Mnyzhaan, naq gbbx njnl gur beanzragf gung jrer ba gurve pnzryf'
arpxf.

8:22 Gura gur zra bs Vfenry fnvq hagb Tvqrba, Ehyr gubh bire hf, obgu
gubh, naq gul fba, naq gul fba'f fba nyfb: sbe gubh unfg qryvirerq hf
sebz gur unaq bs Zvqvna.

8:23 Naq Tvqrba fnvq hagb gurz, V jvyy abg ehyr bire lbh, arvgure
funyy zl fba ehyr bire lbh: gur YBEQ funyy ehyr bire lbh.

8:24 Naq Tvqrba fnvq hagb gurz, V jbhyq qrfver n erdhrfg bs lbh, gung
lr jbhyq tvir zr rirel zna gur rneevatf bs uvf cerl. (Sbe gurl unq
tbyqra rneevatf, orpnhfr gurl jrer Vfuznryvgrf.)  8:25 Naq gurl
nafjrerq, Jr jvyy jvyyvatyl tvir gurz. Naq gurl fcernq n tnezrag, naq
qvq pnfg gurerva rirel zna gur rneevatf bs uvf cerl.

8:26 Naq gur jrvtug bs gur tbyqra rneevatf gung ur erdhrfgrq jnf n
gubhfnaq naq frira uhaqerq furxryf bs tbyq; orfvqr beanzragf, naq
pbyynef, naq checyr envzrag gung jnf ba gur xvatf bs Zvqvna, naq
orfvqr gur punvaf gung jrer nobhg gurve pnzryf' arpxf.

8:27 Naq Tvqrba znqr na rcubq gurerbs, naq chg vg va uvf pvgl, rira va
Bcuenu: naq nyy Vfenry jrag guvgure n jubevat nsgre vg: juvpu guvat
orpnzr n faner hagb Tvqrba, naq gb uvf ubhfr.

8:28 Guhf jnf Zvqvna fhoqhrq orsber gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, fb gung
gurl yvsgrq hc gurve urnqf ab zber. Naq gur pbhagel jnf va dhvrgarff
sbegl lrnef va gur qnlf bs Tvqrba.

8:29 Naq Wrehoonny gur fba bs Wbnfu jrag naq qjryg va uvf bja ubhfr.

8:30 Naq Tvqrba unq guerrfpber naq gra fbaf bs uvf obql ortbggra: sbe
ur unq znal jvirf.

8:31 Naq uvf pbaphovar gung jnf va Furpurz, fur nyfb oner uvz n fba,
jubfr anzr ur pnyyrq Novzryrpu.

8:32 Naq Tvqrba gur fba bs Wbnfu qvrq va n tbbq byq ntr, naq jnf
ohevrq va gur frchypuer bs Wbnfu uvf sngure, va Bcuenu bs gur
Novrmevgrf.

8:33 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf fbba nf Tvqrba jnf qrnq, gung gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry ghearq ntnva, naq jrag n jubevat nsgre Onnyvz, naq
znqr Onnyorevgu gurve tbq.

8:34 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry erzrzorerq abg gur YBEQ gurve Tbq, jub
unq qryvirerq gurz bhg bs gur unaqf bs nyy gurve rarzvrf ba rirel
fvqr: 8:35 Arvgure furjrq gurl xvaqarff gb gur ubhfr bs Wrehoonny,
anzryl, Tvqrba, nppbeqvat gb nyy gur tbbqarff juvpu ur unq furjrq hagb
Vfenry.

9:1 Naq Novzryrpu gur fba bs Wrehoonny jrag gb Furpurz hagb uvf
zbgure'f oerguera, naq pbzzharq jvgu gurz, naq jvgu nyy gur snzvyl bs
gur ubhfr bs uvf zbgure'f sngure, fnlvat, 9:2 Fcrnx, V cenl lbh, va
gur rnef bs nyy gur zra bs Furpurz, Jurgure vf orggre sbe lbh, rvgure
gung nyy gur fbaf bs Wrehoonny, juvpu ner guerrfpber naq gra crefbaf,
ervta bire lbh, be gung bar ervta bire lbh? erzrzore nyfb gung V nz
lbhe obar naq lbhe syrfu.

9:3 Naq uvf zbgure'f oerguera fcnxr bs uvz va gur rnef bs nyy gur zra
bs Furpurz nyy gurfr jbeqf: naq gurve urnegf vapyvarq gb sbyybj
Novzryrpu; sbe gurl fnvq, Ur vf bhe oebgure.

9:4 Naq gurl tnir uvz guerrfpber naq gra cvrprf bs fvyire bhg bs gur
ubhfr bs Onnyorevgu, jurerjvgu Novzryrpu uverq inva naq yvtug crefbaf,
juvpu sbyybjrq uvz.

9:5 Naq ur jrag hagb uvf sngure'f ubhfr ng Bcuenu, naq fyrj uvf
oerguera gur fbaf bs Wrehoonny, orvat guerrfpber naq gra crefbaf, hcba
bar fgbar: abgjvgufgnaqvat lrg Wbgunz gur lbhatrfg fba bs Wrehoonny
jnf yrsg; sbe ur uvq uvzfrys.

9:6 Naq nyy gur zra bs Furpurz tngurerq gbtrgure, naq nyy gur ubhfr bs
Zvyyb, naq jrag, naq znqr Novzryrpu xvat, ol gur cynva bs gur cvyyne
gung jnf va Furpurz.

9:7 Naq jura gurl gbyq vg gb Wbgunz, ur jrag naq fgbbq va gur gbc bs
zbhag Trevmvz, naq yvsgrq hc uvf ibvpr, naq pevrq, naq fnvq hagb gurz,
Urnexra hagb zr, lr zra bs Furpurz, gung Tbq znl urnexra hagb lbh.

9:8 Gur gerrf jrag sbegu ba n gvzr gb nabvag n xvat bire gurz; naq
gurl fnvq hagb gur byvir gerr, Ervta gubh bire hf.

9:9 Ohg gur byvir gerr fnvq hagb gurz, Fubhyq V yrnir zl sngarff,
jurerjvgu ol zr gurl ubabhe Tbq naq zna, naq tb gb or cebzbgrq bire
gur gerrf?  9:10 Naq gur gerrf fnvq gb gur svt gerr, Pbzr gubh, naq
ervta bire hf.

9:11 Ohg gur svt gerr fnvq hagb gurz, Fubhyq V sbefnxr zl fjrrgarff,
naq zl tbbq sehvg, naq tb gb or cebzbgrq bire gur gerrf?  9:12 Gura
fnvq gur gerrf hagb gur ivar, Pbzr gubh, naq ervta bire hf.

9:13 Naq gur ivar fnvq hagb gurz, Fubhyq V yrnir zl jvar, juvpu
purrergu Tbq naq zna, naq tb gb or cebzbgrq bire gur gerrf?  9:14 Gura
fnvq nyy gur gerrf hagb gur oenzoyr, Pbzr gubh, naq ervta bire hf.

9:15 Naq gur oenzoyr fnvq hagb gur gerrf, Vs va gehgu lr nabvag zr
xvat bire lbh, gura pbzr naq chg lbhe gehfg va zl funqbj: naq vs abg,
yrg sver pbzr bhg bs gur oenzoyr, naq qribhe gur prqnef bs Yronaba.

9:16 Abj gurersber, vs lr unir qbar gehyl naq fvapreryl, va gung lr
unir znqr Novzryrpu xvat, naq vs lr unir qrnyg jryy jvgu Wrehoonny naq
uvf ubhfr, naq unir qbar hagb uvz nppbeqvat gb gur qrfreivat bs uvf
unaqf; 9:17 (Sbe zl sngure sbhtug sbe lbh, naq nqiragherq uvf yvsr
sne, naq qryvirerq lbh bhg bs gur unaq bs Zvqvna: 9:18 Naq lr ner
evfra hc ntnvafg zl sngure'f ubhfr guvf qnl, naq unir fynva uvf fbaf,
guerrfpber naq gra crefbaf, hcba bar fgbar, naq unir znqr Novzryrpu,
gur fba bs uvf znvqfreinag, xvat bire gur zra bs Furpurz, orpnhfr ur
vf lbhe oebgure;) 9:19 Vs lr gura unir qrnyg gehyl naq fvapreryl jvgu
Wrehoonny naq jvgu uvf ubhfr guvf qnl, gura erwbvpr lr va Novzryrpu,
naq yrg uvz nyfb erwbvpr va lbh: 9:20 Ohg vs abg, yrg sver pbzr bhg
sebz Novzryrpu, naq qribhe gur zra bs Furpurz, naq gur ubhfr bs Zvyyb;
naq yrg sver pbzr bhg sebz gur zra bs Furpurz, naq sebz gur ubhfr bs
Zvyyb, naq qribhe Novzryrpu.

9:21 Naq Wbgunz ena njnl, naq syrq, naq jrag gb Orre, naq qjryg gurer,
sbe srne bs Novzryrpu uvf oebgure.

9:22 Jura Novzryrpu unq ervtarq guerr lrnef bire Vfenry, 9:23 Gura Tbq
frag na rivy fcvevg orgjrra Novzryrpu naq gur zra bs Furpurz; naq gur
zra bs Furpurz qrnyg gernpurebhfyl jvgu Novzryrpu: 9:24 Gung gur
pehrygl qbar gb gur guerrfpber naq gra fbaf bs Wrehoonny zvtug pbzr,
naq gurve oybbq or ynvq hcba Novzryrpu gurve oebgure, juvpu fyrj gurz;
naq hcba gur zra bs Furpurz, juvpu nvqrq uvz va gur xvyyvat bs uvf
oerguera.

9:25 Naq gur zra bs Furpurz frg yvref va jnvg sbe uvz va gur gbc bs
gur zbhagnvaf, naq gurl eboorq nyy gung pnzr nybat gung jnl ol gurz:
naq vg jnf gbyq Novzryrpu.

9:26 Naq Tnny gur fba bs Rorq pnzr jvgu uvf oerguera, naq jrag bire gb
Furpurz: naq gur zra bs Furpurz chg gurve pbasvqrapr va uvz.

9:27 Naq gurl jrag bhg vagb gur svryqf, naq tngurerq gurve ivarlneqf,
naq gebqr gur tencrf, naq znqr zreel, naq jrag vagb gur ubhfr bs gurve
tbq, naq qvq rng naq qevax, naq phefrq Novzryrpu.

9:28 Naq Tnny gur fba bs Rorq fnvq, Jub vf Novzryrpu, naq jub vf
Furpurz, gung jr fubhyq freir uvz? vf abg ur gur fba bs Wrehoonny? naq
Mrohy uvf bssvpre? freir gur zra bs Unzbe gur sngure bs Furpurz: sbe
jul fubhyq jr freir uvz?  9:29 Naq jbhyq gb Tbq guvf crbcyr jrer haqre
zl unaq! gura jbhyq V erzbir Novzryrpu. Naq ur fnvq gb Novzryrpu,
Vapernfr guvar nezl, naq pbzr bhg.

9:30 Naq jura Mrohy gur ehyre bs gur pvgl urneq gur jbeqf bs Tnny gur
fba bs Rorq, uvf natre jnf xvaqyrq.

9:31 Naq ur frag zrffratref hagb Novzryrpu cevivyl, fnlvat, Orubyq,
Tnny gur fba bs Rorq naq uvf oerguera or pbzr gb Furpurz; naq, orubyq,
gurl sbegvsl gur pvgl ntnvafg gurr.

9:32 Abj gurersber hc ol avtug, gubh naq gur crbcyr gung vf jvgu gurr,
naq yvr va jnvg va gur svryq: 9:33 Naq vg funyy or, gung va gur
zbeavat, nf fbba nf gur fha vf hc, gubh funyg evfr rneyl, naq frg hcba
gur pvgl: naq, orubyq, jura ur naq gur crbcyr gung vf jvgu uvz pbzr
bhg ntnvafg gurr, gura znlrfg gubh qb gb gurz nf gubh funyg svaq
bppnfvba.

9:34 Naq Novzryrpu ebfr hc, naq nyy gur crbcyr gung jrer jvgu uvz, ol
avtug, naq gurl ynvq jnvg ntnvafg Furpurz va sbhe pbzcnavrf.

9:35 Naq Tnny gur fba bs Rorq jrag bhg, naq fgbbq va gur ragrevat bs
gur tngr bs gur pvgl: naq Novzryrpu ebfr hc, naq gur crbcyr gung jrer
jvgu uvz, sebz ylvat va jnvg.

9:36 Naq jura Tnny fnj gur crbcyr, ur fnvq gb Mrohy, Orubyq, gurer
pbzr crbcyr qbja sebz gur gbc bs gur zbhagnvaf. Naq Mrohy fnvq hagb
uvz, Gubh frrfg gur funqbj bs gur zbhagnvaf nf vs gurl jrer zra.

9:37 Naq Tnny fcnxr ntnva, naq fnvq, Frr gurer pbzr crbcyr qbja ol gur
zvqqyr bs gur ynaq, naq nabgure pbzcnal pbzr nybat ol gur cynva bs
Zrbaravz.

9:38 Gura fnvq Mrohy hagb uvz, Jurer vf abj gul zbhgu, jurerjvgu gubh
fnvqfg, Jub vf Novzryrpu, gung jr fubhyq freir uvz? vf abg guvf gur
crbcyr gung gubh unfg qrfcvfrq? tb bhg, V cenl abj, naq svtug jvgu
gurz.

9:39 Naq Tnny jrag bhg orsber gur zra bs Furpurz, naq sbhtug jvgu
Novzryrpu.

9:40 Naq Novzryrpu punfrq uvz, naq ur syrq orsber uvz, naq znal jrer
bireguebja naq jbhaqrq, rira hagb gur ragrevat bs gur tngr.

9:41 Naq Novzryrpu qjryg ng Nehznu: naq Mrohy guehfg bhg Tnny naq uvf
oerguera, gung gurl fubhyq abg qjryy va Furpurz.

9:42 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ba gur zbeebj, gung gur crbcyr jrag bhg vagb
gur svryq; naq gurl gbyq Novzryrpu.

9:43 Naq ur gbbx gur crbcyr, naq qvivqrq gurz vagb guerr pbzcnavrf,
naq ynvq jnvg va gur svryq, naq ybbxrq, naq, orubyq, gur crbcyr jrer
pbzr sbegu bhg bs gur pvgl; naq ur ebfr hc ntnvafg gurz, naq fzbgr
gurz.

9:44 Naq Novzryrpu, naq gur pbzcnal gung jnf jvgu uvz, ehfurq sbejneq,
naq fgbbq va gur ragrevat bs gur tngr bs gur pvgl: naq gur gjb bgure
pbzcnavrf ena hcba nyy gur crbcyr gung jrer va gur svryqf, naq fyrj
gurz.

9:45 Naq Novzryrpu sbhtug ntnvafg gur pvgl nyy gung qnl; naq ur gbbx
gur pvgl, naq fyrj gur crbcyr gung jnf gurerva, naq orng qbja gur
pvgl, naq fbjrq vg jvgu fnyg.

9:46 Naq jura nyy gur zra bs gur gbjre bs Furpurz urneq gung, gurl
ragrerq vagb na ubyq bs gur ubhfr bs gur tbq Orevgu.

9:47 Naq vg jnf gbyq Novzryrpu, gung nyy gur zra bs gur gbjre bs
Furpurz jrer tngurerq gbtrgure.

9:48 Naq Novzryrpu tng uvz hc gb zbhag Mnyzba, ur naq nyy gur crbcyr
gung jrer jvgu uvz; naq Novzryrpu gbbx na nkr va uvf unaq, naq phg
qbja n obhtu sebz gur gerrf, naq gbbx vg, naq ynvq vg ba uvf fubhyqre,
naq fnvq hagb gur crbcyr gung jrer jvgu uvz, Jung lr unir frra zr qb,
znxr unfgr, naq qb nf V unir qbar.

9:49 Naq nyy gur crbcyr yvxrjvfr phg qbja rirel zna uvf obhtu, naq
sbyybjrq Novzryrpu, naq chg gurz gb gur ubyq, naq frg gur ubyq ba sver
hcba gurz; fb gung nyy gur zra bs gur gbjre bs Furpurz qvrq nyfb,
nobhg n gubhfnaq zra naq jbzra.

9:50 Gura jrag Novzryrpu gb Gurorm, naq rapnzcrq ntnvafg Gurorm, naq
gbbx vg.

9:51 Ohg gurer jnf n fgebat gbjre jvguva gur pvgl, naq guvgure syrq
nyy gur zra naq jbzra, naq nyy gurl bs gur pvgl, naq fuhg vg gb gurz,
naq tng gurz hc gb gur gbc bs gur gbjre.

9:52 Naq Novzryrpu pnzr hagb gur gbjre, naq sbhtug ntnvafg vg, naq
jrag uneq hagb gur qbbe bs gur gbjre gb ohea vg jvgu sver.

9:53 Naq n pregnva jbzna pnfg n cvrpr bs n zvyyfgbar hcba Novzryrpu'f
urnq, naq nyy gb oenxr uvf fxhyy.

9:54 Gura ur pnyyrq unfgvyl hagb gur lbhat zna uvf nezbheornere, naq
fnvq hagb uvz, Qenj gul fjbeq, naq fynl zr, gung zra fnl abg bs zr, N
jbzra fyrj uvz. Naq uvf lbhat zna guehfg uvz guebhtu, naq ur qvrq.

9:55 Naq jura gur zra bs Vfenry fnj gung Novzryrpu jnf qrnq, gurl
qrcnegrq rirel zna hagb uvf cynpr.

9:56 Guhf Tbq eraqrerq gur jvpxrqarff bs Novzryrpu, juvpu ur qvq hagb
uvf sngure, va fynlvat uvf friragl oerguera: 9:57 Naq nyy gur rivy bs
gur zra bs Furpurz qvq Tbq eraqre hcba gurve urnqf: naq hcba gurz pnzr
gur phefr bs Wbgunz gur fba bs Wrehoonny.

10:1 Naq nsgre Novzryrpu gurer nebfr gb qrsraq Vfenry Gbyn gur fba bs
Chnu, gur fba bs Qbqb, n zna bs Vffnpune; naq ur qjryg va Funzve va
zbhag Rcuenvz.

10:2 Naq ur whqtrq Vfenry gjragl naq guerr lrnef, naq qvrq, naq jnf
ohevrq va Funzve.

10:3 Naq nsgre uvz nebfr Wnve, n Tvyrnqvgr, naq whqtrq Vfenry gjragl
naq gjb lrnef.

10:4 Naq ur unq guvegl fbaf gung ebqr ba guvegl nff pbygf, naq gurl
unq guvegl pvgvrf, juvpu ner pnyyrq Unibguwnve hagb guvf qnl, juvpu
ner va gur ynaq bs Tvyrnq.

10:5 Naq Wnve qvrq, naq jnf ohevrq va Pnzba.

10:6 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq rivy ntnva va gur fvtug bs gur
YBEQ, naq freirq Onnyvz, naq Nfugnebgu, naq gur tbqf bs Flevn, naq gur
tbqf bs Mvqba, naq gur tbqf bs Zbno, naq gur tbqf bs gur puvyqera bs
Nzzba, naq gur tbqf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf, naq sbefbbx gur YBEQ, naq
freirq abg uvz.

10:7 Naq gur natre bs gur YBEQ jnf ubg ntnvafg Vfenry, naq ur fbyq
gurz vagb gur unaqf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf, naq vagb gur unaqf bs gur
puvyqera bs Nzzba.

10:8 Naq gung lrne gurl irkrq naq bccerffrq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry:
rvtugrra lrnef, nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry gung jrer ba gur bgure fvqr
Wbeqna va gur ynaq bs gur Nzbevgrf, juvpu vf va Tvyrnq.

10:9 Zberbire gur puvyqera bs Nzzba cnffrq bire Wbeqna gb svtug nyfb
ntnvafg Whqnu, naq ntnvafg Orawnzva, naq ntnvafg gur ubhfr bs Rcuenvz;
fb gung Vfenry jnf fber qvfgerffrq.

10:10 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry pevrq hagb gur YBEQ, fnlvat, Jr unir
fvaarq ntnvafg gurr, obgu orpnhfr jr unir sbefnxra bhe Tbq, naq nyfb
freirq Onnyvz.

10:11 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, Qvq abg V qryvire
lbh sebz gur Rtlcgvnaf, naq sebz gur Nzbevgrf, sebz gur puvyqera bs
Nzzba, naq sebz gur Cuvyvfgvarf?  10:12 Gur Mvqbavnaf nyfb, naq gur
Nznyrxvgrf, naq gur Znbavgrf, qvq bccerff lbh; naq lr pevrq gb zr, naq
V qryvirerq lbh bhg bs gurve unaq.

10:13 Lrg lr unir sbefnxra zr, naq freirq bgure tbqf: jurersber V jvyy
qryvire lbh ab zber.

10:14 Tb naq pel hagb gur tbqf juvpu lr unir pubfra; yrg gurz qryvire
lbh va gur gvzr bs lbhe gevohyngvba.

10:15 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry fnvq hagb gur YBEQ, Jr unir fvaarq:
qb gubh hagb hf jungfbrire frrzrgu tbbq hagb gurr; qryvire hf bayl, jr
cenl gurr, guvf qnl.

10:16 Naq gurl chg njnl gur fgenatr tbqf sebz nzbat gurz, naq freirq
gur YBEQ: naq uvf fbhy jnf tevrirq sbe gur zvfrel bs Vfenry.

10:17 Gura gur puvyqera bs Nzzba jrer tngurerq gbtrgure, naq rapnzcrq
va Tvyrnq. Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry nffrzoyrq gurzfryirf gbtrgure,
naq rapnzcrq va Zvmcru.

10:18 Naq gur crbcyr naq cevaprf bs Tvyrnq fnvq bar gb nabgure, Jung
zna vf ur gung jvyy ortva gb svtug ntnvafg gur puvyqera bs Nzzba? ur
funyy or urnq bire nyy gur vaunovgnagf bs Tvyrnq.

11:1 Abj Wrcugunu gur Tvyrnqvgr jnf n zvtugl zna bs inybhe, naq ur jnf
gur fba bs na uneybg: naq Tvyrnq ortng Wrcugunu.

11:2 Naq Tvyrnq'f jvsr oner uvz fbaf; naq uvf jvsr'f fbaf terj hc, naq
gurl guehfg bhg Wrcugunu, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Gubh funyg abg vaurevg va
bhe sngure'f ubhfr; sbe gubh neg gur fba bs n fgenatr jbzna.

11:3 Gura Wrcugunu syrq sebz uvf oerguera, naq qjryg va gur ynaq bs
Gbo: naq gurer jrer tngurerq inva zra gb Wrcugunu, naq jrag bhg jvgu
uvz.

11:4 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va cebprff bs gvzr, gung gur puvyqera bs
Nzzba znqr jne ntnvafg Vfenry.

11:5 Naq vg jnf fb, gung jura gur puvyqera bs Nzzba znqr jne ntnvafg
Vfenry, gur ryqref bs Tvyrnq jrag gb srgpu Wrcugunu bhg bs gur ynaq bs
Gbo: 11:6 Naq gurl fnvq hagb Wrcugunu, Pbzr, naq or bhe pncgnva, gung
jr znl svtug jvgu gur puvyqera bs Nzzba.

11:7 Naq Wrcugunu fnvq hagb gur ryqref bs Tvyrnq, Qvq abg lr ungr zr,
naq rkcry zr bhg bs zl sngure'f ubhfr? naq jul ner lr pbzr hagb zr abj
jura lr ner va qvfgerff?  11:8 Naq gur ryqref bs Tvyrnq fnvq hagb
Wrcugunu, Gurersber jr ghea ntnva gb gurr abj, gung gubh znlrfg tb
jvgu hf, naq svtug ntnvafg gur puvyqera bs Nzzba, naq or bhe urnq bire
nyy gur vaunovgnagf bs Tvyrnq.

11:9 Naq Wrcugunu fnvq hagb gur ryqref bs Tvyrnq, Vs lr oevat zr ubzr
ntnva gb svtug ntnvafg gur puvyqera bs Nzzba, naq gur YBEQ qryvire
gurz orsber zr, funyy V or lbhe urnq?  11:10 Naq gur ryqref bs Tvyrnq
fnvq hagb Wrcugunu, Gur YBEQ or jvgarff orgjrra hf, vs jr qb abg fb
nppbeqvat gb gul jbeqf.

11:11 Gura Wrcugunu jrag jvgu gur ryqref bs Tvyrnq, naq gur crbcyr
znqr uvz urnq naq pncgnva bire gurz: naq Wrcugunu hggrerq nyy uvf
jbeqf orsber gur YBEQ va Zvmcru.

11:12 Naq Wrcugunu frag zrffratref hagb gur xvat bs gur puvyqera bs
Nzzba, fnlvat, Jung unfg gubh gb qb jvgu zr, gung gubh neg pbzr
ntnvafg zr gb svtug va zl ynaq?  11:13 Naq gur xvat bs gur puvyqera bs
Nzzba nafjrerq hagb gur zrffratref bs Wrcugunu, Orpnhfr Vfenry gbbx
njnl zl ynaq, jura gurl pnzr hc bhg bs Rtlcg, sebz Neaba rira hagb
Wnoobx, naq hagb Wbeqna: abj gurersber erfgber gubfr ynaqf ntnva
crnprnoyl.

11:14 Naq Wrcugunu frag zrffratref ntnva hagb gur xvat bs gur puvyqera
bs Nzzba: 11:15 Naq fnvq hagb uvz, Guhf fnvgu Wrcugunu, Vfenry gbbx
abg njnl gur ynaq bs Zbno, abe gur ynaq bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba:
11:16 Ohg jura Vfenry pnzr hc sebz Rtlcg, naq jnyxrq guebhtu gur
jvyqrearff hagb gur Erq frn, naq pnzr gb Xnqrfu; 11:17 Gura Vfenry
frag zrffratref hagb gur xvat bs Rqbz, fnlvat, Yrg zr, V cenl gurr,
cnff guebhtu gul ynaq: ohg gur xvat bs Rqbz jbhyq abg urnexra gurergb.
Naq va yvxr znaare gurl frag hagb gur xvat bs Zbno: ohg ur jbhyq abg
pbafrag: naq Vfenry nobqr va Xnqrfu.

11:18 Gura gurl jrag nybat guebhtu gur jvyqrearff, naq pbzcnffrq gur
ynaq bs Rqbz, naq gur ynaq bs Zbno, naq pnzr ol gur rnfg fvqr bs gur
ynaq bs Zbno, naq cvgpurq ba gur bgure fvqr bs Neaba, ohg pnzr abg
jvguva gur obeqre bs Zbno: sbe Neaba jnf gur obeqre bs Zbno.

11:19 Naq Vfenry frag zrffratref hagb Fvuba xvat bs gur Nzbevgrf, gur
xvat bs Urfuoba; naq Vfenry fnvq hagb uvz, Yrg hf cnff, jr cenl gurr,
guebhtu gul ynaq vagb zl cynpr.

11:20 Ohg Fvuba gehfgrq abg Vfenry gb cnff guebhtu uvf pbnfg: ohg
Fvuba tngurerq nyy uvf crbcyr gbtrgure, naq cvgpurq va Wnunm, naq
sbhtug ntnvafg Vfenry.

11:21 Naq gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry qryvirerq Fvuba naq nyy uvf crbcyr
vagb gur unaq bs Vfenry, naq gurl fzbgr gurz: fb Vfenry cbffrffrq nyy
gur ynaq bs gur Nzbevgrf, gur vaunovgnagf bs gung pbhagel.

11:22 Naq gurl cbffrffrq nyy gur pbnfgf bs gur Nzbevgrf, sebz Neaba
rira hagb Wnoobx, naq sebz gur jvyqrearff rira hagb Wbeqna.

11:23 Fb abj gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry ungu qvfcbffrffrq gur Nzbevgrf
sebz orsber uvf crbcyr Vfenry, naq fubhyqrfg gubh cbffrff vg?  11:24
Jvyg abg gubh cbffrff gung juvpu Purzbfu gul tbq tvirgu gurr gb
cbffrff? Fb jubzfbrire gur YBEQ bhe Tbq funyy qevir bhg sebz orsber
hf, gurz jvyy jr cbffrff.

11:25 Naq abj neg gubh nal guvat orggre guna Onynx gur fba bs Mvccbe,
xvat bs Zbno? qvq ur rire fgevir ntnvafg Vfenry, be qvq ur rire svtug
ntnvafg gurz, 11:26 Juvyr Vfenry qjryg va Urfuoba naq ure gbjaf, naq
va Nebre naq ure gbjaf, naq va nyy gur pvgvrf gung or nybat ol gur
pbnfgf bs Neaba, guerr uhaqerq lrnef? jul gurersber qvq lr abg erpbire
gurz jvguva gung gvzr?  11:27 Jurersber V unir abg fvaarq ntnvafg
gurr, ohg gubh qbrfg zr jebat gb jne ntnvafg zr: gur YBEQ gur Whqtr or
whqtr guvf qnl orgjrra gur puvyqera bs Vfenry naq gur puvyqera bs
Nzzba.

11:28 Ubjorvg gur xvat bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba urnexrarq abg hagb gur
jbeqf bs Wrcugunu juvpu ur frag uvz.

11:29 Gura gur Fcvevg bs gur YBEQ pnzr hcba Wrcugunu, naq ur cnffrq
bire Tvyrnq, naq Znanffru, naq cnffrq bire Zvmcru bs Tvyrnq, naq sebz
Zvmcru bs Tvyrnq ur cnffrq bire hagb gur puvyqera bs Nzzba.

11:30 Naq Wrcugunu ibjrq n ibj hagb gur YBEQ, naq fnvq, Vs gubh funyg
jvgubhg snvy qryvire gur puvyqera bs Nzzba vagb zvar unaqf, 11:31 Gura
vg funyy or, gung jungfbrire pbzrgu sbegu bs gur qbbef bs zl ubhfr gb
zrrg zr, jura V erghea va crnpr sebz gur puvyqera bs Nzzba, funyy
fheryl or gur YBEQ'f, naq V jvyy bssre vg hc sbe n oheag bssrevat.

11:32 Fb Wrcugunu cnffrq bire hagb gur puvyqera bs Nzzba gb svtug
ntnvafg gurz; naq gur YBEQ qryvirerq gurz vagb uvf unaqf.

11:33 Naq ur fzbgr gurz sebz Nebre, rira gvyy gubh pbzr gb Zvaavgu,
rira gjragl pvgvrf, naq hagb gur cynva bs gur ivarlneqf, jvgu n irel
terng fynhtugre. Guhf gur puvyqera bs Nzzba jrer fhoqhrq orsber gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry.

11:34 Naq Wrcugunu pnzr gb Zvmcru hagb uvf ubhfr, naq, orubyq, uvf
qnhtugre pnzr bhg gb zrrg uvz jvgu gvzoeryf naq jvgu qnaprf: naq fur
jnf uvf bayl puvyq; orfvqr ure ur unq arvgure fba abe qnhtugre.

11:35 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura ur fnj ure, gung ur erag uvf pybgurf,
naq fnvq, Nynf, zl qnhtugre! gubh unfg oebhtug zr irel ybj, naq gubh
neg bar bs gurz gung gebhoyr zr: sbe V unir bcrarq zl zbhgu hagb gur
YBEQ, naq V pnaabg tb onpx.

11:36 Naq fur fnvq hagb uvz, Zl sngure, vs gubh unfg bcrarq gul zbhgu
hagb gur YBEQ, qb gb zr nppbeqvat gb gung juvpu ungu cebprrqrq bhg bs
gul zbhgu; sbenfzhpu nf gur YBEQ ungu gnxra iratrnapr sbe gurr bs
guvar rarzvrf, rira bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba.

11:37 Naq fur fnvq hagb ure sngure, Yrg guvf guvat or qbar sbe zr: yrg
zr nybar gjb zbaguf, gung V znl tb hc naq qbja hcba gur zbhagnvaf, naq
orjnvy zl ivetvavgl, V naq zl sryybjf.

11:38 Naq ur fnvq, Tb. Naq ur frag ure njnl sbe gjb zbaguf: naq fur
jrag jvgu ure pbzcnavbaf, naq orjnvyrq ure ivetvavgl hcba gur
zbhagnvaf.

11:39 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng gur raq bs gjb zbaguf, gung fur erghearq
hagb ure sngure, jub qvq jvgu ure nppbeqvat gb uvf ibj juvpu ur unq
ibjrq: naq fur xarj ab zna. Naq vg jnf n phfgbz va Vfenry, 11:40 Gung
gur qnhtugref bs Vfenry jrag lrneyl gb ynzrag gur qnhtugre bs Wrcugunu
gur Tvyrnqvgr sbhe qnlf va n lrne.

12:1 Naq gur zra bs Rcuenvz tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure, naq jrag
abegujneq, naq fnvq hagb Wrcugunu, Jurersber cnffrqfg gubh bire gb
svtug ntnvafg gur puvyqera bs Nzzba, naq qvqfg abg pnyy hf gb tb jvgu
gurr? jr jvyy ohea guvar ubhfr hcba gurr jvgu sver.

12:2 Naq Wrcugunu fnvq hagb gurz, V naq zl crbcyr jrer ng terng fgevsr
jvgu gur puvyqera bs Nzzba; naq jura V pnyyrq lbh, lr qryvirerq zr abg
bhg bs gurve unaqf.

12:3 Naq jura V fnj gung lr qryvirerq zr abg, V chg zl yvsr va zl
unaqf, naq cnffrq bire ntnvafg gur puvyqera bs Nzzba, naq gur YBEQ
qryvirerq gurz vagb zl unaq: jurersber gura ner lr pbzr hc hagb zr
guvf qnl, gb svtug ntnvafg zr?  12:4 Gura Wrcugunu tngurerq gbtrgure
nyy gur zra bs Tvyrnq, naq sbhtug jvgu Rcuenvz: naq gur zra bs Tvyrnq
fzbgr Rcuenvz, orpnhfr gurl fnvq, Lr Tvyrnqvgrf ner shtvgvirf bs
Rcuenvz nzbat gur Rcuenvzvgrf, naq nzbat gur Znanffvgrf.

12:5 Naq gur Tvyrnqvgrf gbbx gur cnffntrf bs Wbeqna orsber gur
Rcuenvzvgrf: naq vg jnf fb, gung jura gubfr Rcuenvzvgrf juvpu jrer
rfpncrq fnvq, Yrg zr tb bire; gung gur zra bs Tvyrnq fnvq hagb uvz,
Neg gubh na Rcuenvzvgr? Vs ur fnvq, Anl; 12:6 Gura fnvq gurl hagb uvz,
Fnl abj Fuvoobyrgu: naq ur fnvq Fvoobyrgu: sbe ur pbhyq abg senzr gb
cebabhapr vg evtug. Gura gurl gbbx uvz, naq fyrj uvz ng gur cnffntrf
bs Wbeqna: naq gurer sryy ng gung gvzr bs gur Rcuenvzvgrf sbegl naq
gjb gubhfnaq.

12:7 Naq Wrcugunu whqtrq Vfenry fvk lrnef. Gura qvrq Wrcugunu gur
Tvyrnqvgr, naq jnf ohevrq va bar bs gur pvgvrf bs Tvyrnq.

12:8 Naq nsgre uvz Vomna bs Orguyrurz whqtrq Vfenry.

12:9 Naq ur unq guvegl fbaf, naq guvegl qnhtugref, jubz ur frag
noebnq, naq gbbx va guvegl qnhtugref sebz noebnq sbe uvf fbaf. Naq ur
whqtrq Vfenry frira lrnef.

12:10 Gura qvrq Vomna, naq jnf ohevrq ng Orguyrurz.

12:11 Naq nsgre uvz Ryba, n Mrohybavgr, whqtrq Vfenry; naq ur whqtrq
Vfenry gra lrnef.

12:12 Naq Ryba gur Mrohybavgr qvrq, naq jnf ohevrq va Nvwnyba va gur
pbhagel bs Mrohyha.

12:13 Naq nsgre uvz Noqba gur fba bs Uvyyry, n Cvengubavgr, whqtrq
Vfenry.

12:14 Naq ur unq sbegl fbaf naq guvegl arcurjf, gung ebqr ba
guerrfpber naq gra nff pbygf: naq ur whqtrq Vfenry rvtug lrnef.

12:15 Naq Noqba gur fba bs Uvyyry gur Cvengubavgr qvrq, naq jnf ohevrq
va Cvenguba va gur ynaq bs Rcuenvz, va gur zbhag bs gur Nznyrxvgrf.

13:1 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq rivy ntnva va gur fvtug bs gur
YBEQ; naq gur YBEQ qryvirerq gurz vagb gur unaq bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf
sbegl lrnef.

13:2 Naq gurer jnf n pregnva zna bs Mbenu, bs gur snzvyl bs gur
Qnavgrf, jubfr anzr jnf Znabnu; naq uvf jvsr jnf oneera, naq oner abg.

13:3 Naq gur natry bs gur YBEQ nccrnerq hagb gur jbzna, naq fnvq hagb
ure, Orubyq abj, gubh neg oneera, naq ornerfg abg: ohg gubh funyg
pbaprvir, naq orne n fba.

13:4 Abj gurersber orjner, V cenl gurr, naq qevax abg jvar abe fgebat
qevax, naq rng abg nal hapyrna guvat: 13:5 Sbe, yb, gubh funyg
pbaprvir, naq orne n fba; naq ab enmbe funyy pbzr ba uvf urnq: sbe gur
puvyq funyy or n Anmnevgr hagb Tbq sebz gur jbzo: naq ur funyy ortva
gb qryvire Vfenry bhg bs gur unaq bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf.

13:6 Gura gur jbzna pnzr naq gbyq ure uhfonaq, fnlvat, N zna bs Tbq
pnzr hagb zr, naq uvf pbhagranapr jnf yvxr gur pbhagranapr bs na natry
bs Tbq, irel greevoyr: ohg V nfxrq uvz abg jurapr ur jnf, arvgure gbyq
ur zr uvf anzr: 13:7 Ohg ur fnvq hagb zr, Orubyq, gubh funyg pbaprvir,
naq orne n fba; naq abj qevax ab jvar abe fgebat qevax, arvgure rng
nal hapyrna guvat: sbe gur puvyq funyy or n Anmnevgr gb Tbq sebz gur
jbzo gb gur qnl bs uvf qrngu.

13:8 Gura Znabnu vagerngrq gur YBEQ, naq fnvq, B zl Ybeq, yrg gur zna
bs Tbq juvpu gubh qvqfg fraq pbzr ntnva hagb hf, naq grnpu hf jung jr
funyy qb hagb gur puvyq gung funyy or obea.

13:9 Naq Tbq urnexrarq gb gur ibvpr bs Znabnu; naq gur natry bs Tbq
pnzr ntnva hagb gur jbzna nf fur fng va gur svryq: ohg Znabnu ure
uhfonaq jnf abg jvgu ure.

13:10 Naq gur jbzna znqr unfgr, naq ena, naq furjrq ure uhfonaq, naq
fnvq hagb uvz, Orubyq, gur zna ungu nccrnerq hagb zr, gung pnzr hagb
zr gur bgure qnl.

13:11 Naq Znabnu nebfr, naq jrag nsgre uvf jvsr, naq pnzr gb gur zna,
naq fnvq hagb uvz, Neg gubh gur zna gung fcnxrfg hagb gur jbzna? Naq
ur fnvq, V nz.

13:12 Naq Znabnu fnvq, Abj yrg gul jbeqf pbzr gb cnff. Ubj funyy jr
beqre gur puvyq, naq ubj funyy jr qb hagb uvz?  13:13 Naq gur natry bs
gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Znabnu, Bs nyy gung V fnvq hagb gur jbzna yrg ure
orjner.

13:14 Fur znl abg rng bs nal guvat gung pbzrgu bs gur ivar, arvgure
yrg ure qevax jvar be fgebat qevax, abe rng nal hapyrna guvat: nyy
gung V pbzznaqrq ure yrg ure bofreir.

13:15 Naq Znabnu fnvq hagb gur natry bs gur YBEQ, V cenl gurr, yrg hf
qrgnva gurr, hagvy jr funyy unir znqr ernql n xvq sbe gurr.

13:16 Naq gur natry bs gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Znabnu, Gubhtu gubh qrgnva
zr, V jvyy abg rng bs gul oernq: naq vs gubh jvyg bssre n oheag
bssrevat, gubh zhfg bssre vg hagb gur YBEQ. Sbe Znabnu xarj abg gung
ur jnf na natry bs gur YBEQ.

13:17 Naq Znabnu fnvq hagb gur natry bs gur YBEQ, Jung vf gul anzr,
gung jura gul fnlvatf pbzr gb cnff jr znl qb gurr ubabhe?  13:18 Naq
gur natry bs gur YBEQ fnvq hagb uvz, Jul nfxrfg gubh guhf nsgre zl
anzr, frrvat vg vf frperg?  13:19 Fb Znabnu gbbx n xvq jvgu n zrng
bssrevat, naq bssrerq vg hcba n ebpx hagb gur YBEQ: naq gur natry qvq
jbaqrebhfyl; naq Znabnu naq uvf jvsr ybbxrq ba.

13:20 Sbe vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur synzr jrag hc gbjneq urnira sebz
bss gur nygne, gung gur natry bs gur YBEQ nfpraqrq va gur synzr bs gur
nygne. Naq Znabnu naq uvf jvsr ybbxrq ba vg, naq sryy ba gurve snprf
gb gur tebhaq.

13:21 Ohg gur natry bs gur YBEQ qvq ab zber nccrne gb Znabnu naq gb
uvf jvsr. Gura Znabnu xarj gung ur jnf na natry bs gur YBEQ.

13:22 Naq Znabnu fnvq hagb uvf jvsr, Jr funyy fheryl qvr, orpnhfr jr
unir frra Tbq.

13:23 Ohg uvf jvsr fnvq hagb uvz, Vs gur YBEQ jrer cyrnfrq gb xvyy hf,
ur jbhyq abg unir erprvirq n oheag bssrevat naq n zrng bssrevat ng bhe
unaqf, arvgure jbhyq ur unir furjrq hf nyy gurfr guvatf, abe jbhyq nf
ng guvf gvzr unir gbyq hf fhpu guvatf nf gurfr.

13:24 Naq gur jbzna oner n fba, naq pnyyrq uvf anzr Fnzfba: naq gur
puvyq terj, naq gur YBEQ oyrffrq uvz.

13:25 Naq gur Fcvevg bs gur YBEQ ortna gb zbir uvz ng gvzrf va gur
pnzc bs Qna orgjrra Mbenu naq Rfugnby.

14:1 Naq Fnzfba jrag qbja gb Gvzangu, naq fnj n jbzna va Gvzangu bs
gur qnhtugref bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf.

14:2 Naq ur pnzr hc, naq gbyq uvf sngure naq uvf zbgure, naq fnvq, V
unir frra n jbzna va Gvzangu bs gur qnhtugref bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf: abj
gurersber trg ure sbe zr gb jvsr.

14:3 Gura uvf sngure naq uvf zbgure fnvq hagb uvz, Vf gurer arire n
jbzna nzbat gur qnhtugref bs gul oerguera, be nzbat nyy zl crbcyr,
gung gubh tbrfg gb gnxr n jvsr bs gur hapvephzpvfrq Cuvyvfgvarf? Naq
Fnzfba fnvq hagb uvf sngure, Trg ure sbe zr; sbe fur cyrnfrgu zr jryy.

14:4 Ohg uvf sngure naq uvf zbgure xarj abg gung vg jnf bs gur YBEQ,
gung ur fbhtug na bppnfvba ntnvafg gur Cuvyvfgvarf: sbe ng gung gvzr
gur Cuvyvfgvarf unq qbzvavba bire Vfenry.

14:5 Gura jrag Fnzfba qbja, naq uvf sngure naq uvf zbgure, gb Gvzangu,
naq pnzr gb gur ivarlneqf bs Gvzangu: naq, orubyq, n lbhat yvba ebnerq
ntnvafg uvz.

14:6 Naq gur Fcvevg bs gur YBEQ pnzr zvtugvyl hcba uvz, naq ur erag
uvz nf ur jbhyq unir erag n xvq, naq ur unq abguvat va uvf unaq: ohg
ur gbyq abg uvf sngure be uvf zbgure jung ur unq qbar.

14:7 Naq ur jrag qbja, naq gnyxrq jvgu gur jbzna; naq fur cyrnfrq
Fnzfba jryy.

14:8 Naq nsgre n gvzr ur erghearq gb gnxr ure, naq ur ghearq nfvqr gb
frr gur pnepnfr bs gur yvba: naq, orubyq, gurer jnf n fjnez bs orrf
naq ubarl va gur pnepnfr bs gur yvba.

14:9 Naq ur gbbx gurerbs va uvf unaqf, naq jrag ba rngvat, naq pnzr gb
uvf sngure naq zbgure, naq ur tnir gurz, naq gurl qvq rng: ohg ur gbyq
abg gurz gung ur unq gnxra gur ubarl bhg bs gur pnepnfr bs gur yvba.

14:10 Fb uvf sngure jrag qbja hagb gur jbzna: naq Fnzfba znqr gurer n
srnfg; sbe fb hfrq gur lbhat zra gb qb.

14:11 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gurl fnj uvz, gung gurl oebhtug guvegl
pbzcnavbaf gb or jvgu uvz.

14:12 Naq Fnzfba fnvq hagb gurz, V jvyy abj chg sbegu n evqqyr hagb
lbh: vs lr pna pregnvayl qrpyner vg zr jvguva gur frira qnlf bs gur
srnfg, naq svaq vg bhg, gura V jvyy tvir lbh guvegl furrgf naq guvegl
punatr bs tnezragf: 14:13 Ohg vs lr pnaabg qrpyner vg zr, gura funyy
lr tvir zr guvegl furrgf naq guvegl punatr bs tnezragf. Naq gurl fnvq
hagb uvz, Chg sbegu gul evqqyr, gung jr znl urne vg.

14:14 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Bhg bs gur rngre pnzr sbegu zrng, naq bhg
bs gur fgebat pnzr sbegu fjrrgarff. Naq gurl pbhyq abg va guerr qnlf
rkcbhaq gur evqqyr.

14:15 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ba gur friragu qnl, gung gurl fnvq hagb
Fnzfba'f jvsr, Ragvpr gul uhfonaq, gung ur znl qrpyner hagb hf gur
evqqyr, yrfg jr ohea gurr naq gul sngure'f ubhfr jvgu sver: unir lr
pnyyrq hf gb gnxr gung jr unir? vf vg abg fb?  14:16 Naq Fnzfba'f jvsr
jrcg orsber uvz, naq fnvq, Gubh qbfg ohg ungr zr, naq ybirfg zr abg:
gubh unfg chg sbegu n evqqyr hagb gur puvyqera bs zl crbcyr, naq unfg
abg gbyq vg zr. Naq ur fnvq hagb ure, Orubyq, V unir abg gbyq vg zl
sngure abe zl zbgure, naq funyy V gryy vg gurr?  14:17 Naq fur jrcg
orsber uvz gur frira qnlf, juvyr gurve srnfg ynfgrq: naq vg pnzr gb
cnff ba gur friragu qnl, gung ur gbyq ure, orpnhfr fur ynl fber hcba
uvz: naq fur gbyq gur evqqyr gb gur puvyqera bs ure crbcyr.

14:18 Naq gur zra bs gur pvgl fnvq hagb uvz ba gur friragu qnl orsber
gur fha jrag qbja, Jung vf fjrrgre guna ubarl? Naq jung vf fgebatre
guna n yvba?  naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Vs lr unq abg cybjrq jvgu zl
urvsre, lr unq abg sbhaq bhg zl evqqyr.

14:19 Naq gur Fcvevg bs gur YBEQ pnzr hcba uvz, naq ur jrag qbja gb
Nfuxryba, naq fyrj guvegl zra bs gurz, naq gbbx gurve fcbvy, naq tnir
punatr bs tnezragf hagb gurz juvpu rkcbhaqrq gur evqqyr. Naq uvf natre
jnf xvaqyrq, naq ur jrag hc gb uvf sngure'f ubhfr.

14:20 Ohg Fnzfba'f jvsr jnf tvira gb uvf pbzcnavba, jubz ur unq hfrq
nf uvf sevraq.

15:1 Ohg vg pnzr gb cnff jvguva n juvyr nsgre, va gur gvzr bs jurng
uneirfg, gung Fnzfba ivfvgrq uvf jvsr jvgu n xvq; naq ur fnvq, V jvyy
tb va gb zl jvsr vagb gur punzore. Ohg ure sngure jbhyq abg fhssre uvz
gb tb va.

15:2 Naq ure sngure fnvq, V irevyl gubhtug gung gubh unqfg hggreyl
ungrq ure; gurersber V tnir ure gb gul pbzcnavba: vf abg ure lbhatre
fvfgre snvere guna fur? gnxr ure, V cenl gurr, vafgrnq bs ure.

15:3 Naq Fnzfba fnvq pbapreavat gurz, Abj funyy V or zber oynzryrff
guna gur Cuvyvfgvarf, gubhtu V qb gurz n qvfcyrnfher.

15:4 Naq Fnzfba jrag naq pnhtug guerr uhaqerq sbkrf, naq gbbx
sveroenaqf, naq ghearq gnvy gb gnvy, naq chg n sveroenaq va gur zvqfg
orgjrra gjb gnvyf.

15:5 Naq jura ur unq frg gur oenaqf ba sver, ur yrg gurz tb vagb gur
fgnaqvat pbea bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf, naq oheag hc obgu gur fubpxf, naq
nyfb gur fgnaqvat pbea, jvgu gur ivarlneqf naq byvirf.

15:6 Gura gur Cuvyvfgvarf fnvq, Jub ungu qbar guvf? Naq gurl nafjrerq,
Fnzfba, gur fba va ynj bs gur Gvzavgr, orpnhfr ur unq gnxra uvf jvsr,
naq tvira ure gb uvf pbzcnavba. Naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf pnzr hc, naq oheag
ure naq ure sngure jvgu sver.

15:7 Naq Fnzfba fnvq hagb gurz, Gubhtu lr unir qbar guvf, lrg jvyy V
or niratrq bs lbh, naq nsgre gung V jvyy prnfr.

15:8 Naq ur fzbgr gurz uvc naq guvtu jvgu n terng fynhtugre: naq ur
jrag qbja naq qjryg va gur gbc bs gur ebpx Rgnz.

15:9 Gura gur Cuvyvfgvarf jrag hc, naq cvgpurq va Whqnu, naq fcernq
gurzfryirf va Yruv.

15:10 Naq gur zra bs Whqnu fnvq, Jul ner lr pbzr hc ntnvafg hf? Naq
gurl nafjrerq, Gb ovaq Fnzfba ner jr pbzr hc, gb qb gb uvz nf ur ungu
qbar gb hf.

15:11 Gura guerr gubhfnaq zra bs Whqnu jrag gb gur gbc bs gur ebpx
Rgnz, naq fnvq gb Fnzfba, Xabjrfg gubh abg gung gur Cuvyvfgvarf ner
ehyref bire hf? jung vf guvf gung gubh unfg qbar hagb hf? Naq ur fnvq
hagb gurz, Nf gurl qvq hagb zr, fb unir V qbar hagb gurz.

15:12 Naq gurl fnvq hagb uvz, Jr ner pbzr qbja gb ovaq gurr, gung jr
znl qryvire gurr vagb gur unaq bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf. Naq Fnzfba fnvq
hagb gurz, Fjrne hagb zr, gung lr jvyy abg snyy hcba zr lbhefryirf.

15:13 Naq gurl fcnxr hagb uvz, fnlvat, Ab; ohg jr jvyy ovaq gurr snfg,
naq qryvire gurr vagb gurve unaq: ohg fheryl jr jvyy abg xvyy gurr.
Naq gurl obhaq uvz jvgu gjb arj pbeqf, naq oebhtug uvz hc sebz gur
ebpx.

15:14 Naq jura ur pnzr hagb Yruv, gur Cuvyvfgvarf fubhgrq ntnvafg uvz:
naq gur Fcvevg bs gur YBEQ pnzr zvtugvyl hcba uvz, naq gur pbeqf gung
jrer hcba uvf nezf orpnzr nf synk gung jnf oheag jvgu sver, naq uvf
onaqf ybbfrq sebz bss uvf unaqf.

15:15 Naq ur sbhaq n arj wnjobar bs na nff, naq chg sbegu uvf unaq,
naq gbbx vg, naq fyrj n gubhfnaq zra gurerjvgu.

15:16 Naq Fnzfba fnvq, Jvgu gur wnjobar bs na nff, urncf hcba urncf,
jvgu gur wnj bs na nff unir V fynva n gubhfnaq zra.

15:17 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura ur unq znqr na raq bs fcrnxvat, gung
ur pnfg njnl gur wnjobar bhg bs uvf unaq, naq pnyyrq gung cynpr
Enznguyruv.

15:18 Naq ur jnf fber nguvefg, naq pnyyrq ba gur YBEQ, naq fnvq, Gubh
unfg tvira guvf terng qryvirenapr vagb gur unaq bs gul freinag: naq
abj funyy V qvr sbe guvefg, naq snyy vagb gur unaq bs gur
hapvephzpvfrq?  15:19 Ohg Tbq pynir na ubyybj cynpr gung jnf va gur
wnj, naq gurer pnzr jngre gurerbhg; naq jura ur unq qehax, uvf fcvevg
pnzr ntnva, naq ur erivirq: jurersber ur pnyyrq gur anzr gurerbs
Raunxxber, juvpu vf va Yruv hagb guvf qnl.

15:20 Naq ur whqtrq Vfenry va gur qnlf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf gjragl
lrnef.

16:1 Gura jrag Fnzfba gb Tnmn, naq fnj gurer na uneybg, naq jrag va
hagb ure.

16:2 Naq vg jnf gbyq gur Tnmvgrf, fnlvat, Fnzfba vf pbzr uvgure. Naq
gurl pbzcnffrq uvz va, naq ynvq jnvg sbe uvz nyy avtug va gur tngr bs
gur pvgl, naq jrer dhvrg nyy gur avtug, fnlvat, Va gur zbeavat, jura
vg vf qnl, jr funyy xvyy uvz.

16:3 Naq Fnzfba ynl gvyy zvqavtug, naq nebfr ng zvqavtug, naq gbbx gur
qbbef bs gur tngr bs gur pvgl, naq gur gjb cbfgf, naq jrag njnl jvgu
gurz, one naq nyy, naq chg gurz hcba uvf fubhyqref, naq pneevrq gurz
hc gb gur gbc bs na uvyy gung vf orsber Uroeba.

16:4 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgrejneq, gung ur ybirq n jbzna va gur
inyyrl bs Fberx, jubfr anzr jnf Qryvynu.

16:5 Naq gur ybeqf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf pnzr hc hagb ure, naq fnvq hagb
ure, Ragvpr uvz, naq frr jurerva uvf terng fgeratgu yvrgu, naq ol jung
zrnaf jr znl cerinvy ntnvafg uvz, gung jr znl ovaq uvz gb nssyvpg uvz;
naq jr jvyy tvir gurr rirel bar bs hf ryrira uhaqerq cvrprf bs fvyire.

16:6 Naq Qryvynu fnvq gb Fnzfba, Gryy zr, V cenl gurr, jurerva gul
terng fgeratgu yvrgu, naq jurerjvgu gubh zvtugrfg or obhaq gb nssyvpg
gurr.

16:7 Naq Fnzfba fnvq hagb ure, Vs gurl ovaq zr jvgu frira terra jvguf
gung jrer arire qevrq, gura funyy V or jrnx, naq or nf nabgure zna.

16:8 Gura gur ybeqf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf oebhtug hc gb ure frira terra
jvguf juvpu unq abg orra qevrq, naq fur obhaq uvz jvgu gurz.

16:9 Abj gurer jrer zra ylvat va jnvg, novqvat jvgu ure va gur
punzore.

Naq fur fnvq hagb uvz, Gur Cuvyvfgvarf or hcba gurr, Fnzfba. Naq ur
oenxr gur jvguf, nf n guernq bs gbj vf oebxra jura vg gbhpurgu gur
sver. Fb uvf fgeratgu jnf abg xabja.

16:10 Naq Qryvynu fnvq hagb Fnzfba, Orubyq, gubh unfg zbpxrq zr, naq
gbyq zr yvrf: abj gryy zr, V cenl gurr, jurerjvgu gubh zvtugrfg or
obhaq.

16:11 Naq ur fnvq hagb ure, Vs gurl ovaq zr snfg jvgu arj ebcrf gung
arire jrer bpphcvrq, gura funyy V or jrnx, naq or nf nabgure zna.

16:12 Qryvynu gurersber gbbx arj ebcrf, naq obhaq uvz gurerjvgu, naq
fnvq hagb uvz, Gur Cuvyvfgvarf or hcba gurr, Fnzfba. Naq gurer jrer
yvref va jnvg novqvat va gur punzore. Naq ur oenxr gurz sebz bss uvf
nezf yvxr n guernq.

16:13 Naq Qryvynu fnvq hagb Fnzfba, Uvguregb gubh unfg zbpxrq zr, naq
gbyq zr yvrf: gryy zr jurerjvgu gubh zvtugrfg or obhaq. Naq ur fnvq
hagb ure, Vs gubh jrnirfg gur frira ybpxf bs zl urnq jvgu gur jro.

16:14 Naq fur snfgrarq vg jvgu gur cva, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Gur
Cuvyvfgvarf or hcba gurr, Fnzfba. Naq ur njnxrq bhg bs uvf fyrrc, naq
jrag njnl jvgu gur cva bs gur ornz, naq jvgu gur jro.

16:15 Naq fur fnvq hagb uvz, Ubj pnafg gubh fnl, V ybir gurr, jura
guvar urneg vf abg jvgu zr? gubh unfg zbpxrq zr gurfr guerr gvzrf, naq
unfg abg gbyq zr jurerva gul terng fgeratgu yvrgu.

16:16 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura fur cerffrq uvz qnvyl jvgu ure jbeqf,
naq hetrq uvz, fb gung uvf fbhy jnf irkrq hagb qrngu; 16:17 Gung ur
gbyq ure nyy uvf urneg, naq fnvq hagb ure, Gurer ungu abg pbzr n enmbe
hcba zvar urnq; sbe V unir orra n Anmnevgr hagb Tbq sebz zl zbgure'f
jbzo: vs V or funira, gura zl fgeratgu jvyy tb sebz zr, naq V funyy
orpbzr jrnx, naq or yvxr nal bgure zna.

16:18 Naq jura Qryvynu fnj gung ur unq gbyq ure nyy uvf urneg, fur
frag naq pnyyrq sbe gur ybeqf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf, fnlvat, Pbzr hc guvf
bapr, sbe ur ungu furjrq zr nyy uvf urneg. Gura gur ybeqf bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf pnzr hc hagb ure, naq oebhtug zbarl va gurve unaq.

16:19 Naq fur znqr uvz fyrrc hcba ure xarrf; naq fur pnyyrq sbe n zna,
naq fur pnhfrq uvz gb funir bss gur frira ybpxf bs uvf urnq; naq fur
ortna gb nssyvpg uvz, naq uvf fgeratgu jrag sebz uvz.

16:20 Naq fur fnvq, Gur Cuvyvfgvarf or hcba gurr, Fnzfba. Naq ur njbxr
bhg bs uvf fyrrc, naq fnvq, V jvyy tb bhg nf ng bgure gvzrf orsber,
naq funxr zlfrys. Naq ur jvfg abg gung gur YBEQ jnf qrcnegrq sebz uvz.

16:21 Ohg gur Cuvyvfgvarf gbbx uvz, naq chg bhg uvf rlrf, naq oebhtug
uvz qbja gb Tnmn, naq obhaq uvz jvgu srggref bs oenff; naq ur qvq
tevaq va gur cevfba ubhfr.

16:22 Ubjorvg gur unve bs uvf urnq ortna gb tebj ntnva nsgre ur jnf
funira.

16:23 Gura gur ybeqf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf tngurerq gurz gbtrgure sbe gb
bssre n terng fnpevsvpr hagb Qntba gurve tbq, naq gb erwbvpr: sbe gurl
fnvq, Bhe tbq ungu qryvirerq Fnzfba bhe rarzl vagb bhe unaq.

16:24 Naq jura gur crbcyr fnj uvz, gurl cenvfrq gurve tbq: sbe gurl
fnvq, Bhe tbq ungu qryvirerq vagb bhe unaqf bhe rarzl, naq gur
qrfgeblre bs bhe pbhagel, juvpu fyrj znal bs hf.

16:25 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gurve urnegf jrer zreel, gung gurl
fnvq, Pnyy sbe Fnzfba, gung ur znl znxr hf fcbeg. Naq gurl pnyyrq sbe
Fnzfba bhg bs gur cevfba ubhfr; naq ur znqr gurz fcbeg: naq gurl frg
uvz orgjrra gur cvyynef.

16:26 Naq Fnzfba fnvq hagb gur ynq gung uryq uvz ol gur unaq, Fhssre
zr gung V znl srry gur cvyynef jurerhcba gur ubhfr fgnaqrgu, gung V
znl yrna hcba gurz.

16:27 Abj gur ubhfr jnf shyy bs zra naq jbzra; naq nyy gur ybeqf bs
gur Cuvyvfgvarf jrer gurer; naq gurer jrer hcba gur ebbs nobhg guerr
gubhfnaq zra naq jbzra, gung oruryq juvyr Fnzfba znqr fcbeg.

16:28 Naq Fnzfba pnyyrq hagb gur YBEQ, naq fnvq, B Ybeq Tbq, erzrzore
zr, V cenl gurr, naq fgeratgura zr, V cenl gurr, bayl guvf bapr, B
Tbq, gung V znl or ng bapr niratrq bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf sbe zl gjb rlrf.

16:29 Naq Fnzfba gbbx ubyq bs gur gjb zvqqyr cvyynef hcba juvpu gur
ubhfr fgbbq, naq ba juvpu vg jnf obear hc, bs gur bar jvgu uvf evtug
unaq, naq bs gur bgure jvgu uvf yrsg.

16:30 Naq Fnzfba fnvq, Yrg zr qvr jvgu gur Cuvyvfgvarf. Naq ur objrq
uvzfrys jvgu nyy uvf zvtug; naq gur ubhfr sryy hcba gur ybeqf, naq
hcba nyy gur crbcyr gung jrer gurerva. Fb gur qrnq juvpu ur fyrj ng
uvf qrngu jrer zber guna gurl juvpu ur fyrj va uvf yvsr.

16:31 Gura uvf oerguera naq nyy gur ubhfr bs uvf sngure pnzr qbja, naq
gbbx uvz, naq oebhtug uvz hc, naq ohevrq uvz orgjrra Mbenu naq Rfugnby
va gur ohelvatcynpr bs Znabnu uvf sngure. Naq ur whqtrq Vfenry gjragl
lrnef.

17:1 Naq gurer jnf n zna bs zbhag Rcuenvz, jubfr anzr jnf Zvpnu.

17:2 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvf zbgure, Gur ryrira uhaqerq furxryf bs fvyire
gung jrer gnxra sebz gurr, nobhg juvpu gubh phefrqfg, naq fcnxrfg bs
nyfb va zvar rnef, orubyq, gur fvyire vf jvgu zr; V gbbx vg. Naq uvf
zbgure fnvq, Oyrffrq or gubh bs gur YBEQ, zl fba.

17:3 Naq jura ur unq erfgberq gur ryrira uhaqerq furxryf bs fvyire gb
uvf zbgure, uvf zbgure fnvq, V unq jubyyl qrqvpngrq gur fvyire hagb
gur YBEQ sebz zl unaq sbe zl fba, gb znxr n tenira vzntr naq n zbygra
vzntr: abj gurersber V jvyy erfgber vg hagb gurr.

17:4 Lrg ur erfgberq gur zbarl hagb uvf zbgure; naq uvf zbgure gbbx
gjb uhaqerq furxryf bs fvyire, naq tnir gurz gb gur sbhaqre, jub znqr
gurerbs n tenira vzntr naq n zbygra vzntr: naq gurl jrer va gur ubhfr
bs Zvpnu.

17:5 Naq gur zna Zvpnu unq na ubhfr bs tbqf, naq znqr na rcubq, naq
grencuvz, naq pbafrpengrq bar bs uvf fbaf, jub orpnzr uvf cevrfg.

17:6 Va gubfr qnlf gurer jnf ab xvat va Vfenry, ohg rirel zna qvq gung
juvpu jnf evtug va uvf bja rlrf.

17:7 Naq gurer jnf n lbhat zna bhg bs Orguyrurzwhqnu bs gur snzvyl bs
Whqnu, jub jnf n Yrivgr, naq ur fbwbhearq gurer.

17:8 Naq gur zna qrcnegrq bhg bs gur pvgl sebz Orguyrurzwhqnu gb
fbwbhea jurer ur pbhyq svaq n cynpr: naq ur pnzr gb zbhag Rcuenvz gb
gur ubhfr bs Zvpnu, nf ur wbhearlrq.

17:9 Naq Zvpnu fnvq hagb uvz, Jurapr pbzrfg gubh? Naq ur fnvq hagb
uvz, V nz n Yrivgr bs Orguyrurzwhqnu, naq V tb gb fbwbhea jurer V znl
svaq n cynpr.

17:10 Naq Zvpnu fnvq hagb uvz, Qjryy jvgu zr, naq or hagb zr n sngure
naq n cevrfg, naq V jvyy tvir gurr gra furxryf bs fvyire ol gur lrne,
naq n fhvg bs nccnery, naq gul ivpghnyf. Fb gur Yrivgr jrag va.

17:11 Naq gur Yrivgr jnf pbagrag gb qjryy jvgu gur zna; naq gur lbhat
zna jnf hagb uvz nf bar bs uvf fbaf.

17:12 Naq Zvpnu pbafrpengrq gur Yrivgr; naq gur lbhat zna orpnzr uvf
cevrfg, naq jnf va gur ubhfr bs Zvpnu.

17:13 Gura fnvq Zvpnu, Abj xabj V gung gur YBEQ jvyy qb zr tbbq,
frrvat V unir n Yrivgr gb zl cevrfg.

18:1 Va gubfr qnlf gurer jnf ab xvat va Vfenry: naq va gubfr qnlf gur
gevor bs gur Qnavgrf fbhtug gurz na vaurevgnapr gb qjryy va; sbe hagb
gung qnl nyy gurve vaurevgnapr unq abg snyyra hagb gurz nzbat gur
gevorf bs Vfenry.

18:2 Naq gur puvyqera bs Qna frag bs gurve snzvyl svir zra sebz gurve
pbnfgf, zra bs inybhe, sebz Mbenu, naq sebz Rfugnby, gb fcl bhg gur
ynaq, naq gb frnepu vg; naq gurl fnvq hagb gurz, Tb, frnepu gur ynaq:
jub jura gurl pnzr gb zbhag Rcuenvz, gb gur ubhfr bs Zvpnu, gurl
ybqtrq gurer.

18:3 Jura gurl jrer ol gur ubhfr bs Zvpnu, gurl xarj gur ibvpr bs gur
lbhat zna gur Yrivgr: naq gurl ghearq va guvgure, naq fnvq hagb uvz,
Jub oebhtug gurr uvgure? naq jung znxrfg gubh va guvf cynpr? naq jung
unfg gubh urer?  18:4 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Guhf naq guhf qrnyrgu
Zvpnu jvgu zr, naq ungu uverq zr, naq V nz uvf cevrfg.

18:5 Naq gurl fnvq hagb uvz, Nfx pbhafry, jr cenl gurr, bs Tbq, gung
jr znl xabj jurgure bhe jnl juvpu jr tb funyy or cebfcrebhf.

18:6 Naq gur cevrfg fnvq hagb gurz, Tb va crnpr: orsber gur YBEQ vf
lbhe jnl jurerva lr tb.

18:7 Gura gur svir zra qrcnegrq, naq pnzr gb Ynvfu, naq fnj gur crbcyr
gung jrer gurerva, ubj gurl qjryg pneryrff, nsgre gur znaare bs gur
Mvqbavnaf, dhvrg naq frpher; naq gurer jnf ab zntvfgengr va gur ynaq,
gung zvtug chg gurz gb funzr va nal guvat; naq gurl jrer sne sebz gur
Mvqbavnaf, naq unq ab ohfvarff jvgu nal zna.

18:8 Naq gurl pnzr hagb gurve oerguera gb Mbenu naq Rfugnby: naq gurve
oerguera fnvq hagb gurz, Jung fnl lr?  18:9 Naq gurl fnvq, Nevfr, gung
jr znl tb hc ntnvafg gurz: sbe jr unir frra gur ynaq, naq, orubyq, vg
vf irel tbbq: naq ner lr fgvyy? or abg fybgushy gb tb, naq gb ragre gb
cbffrff gur ynaq.

18:10 Jura lr tb, lr funyy pbzr hagb n crbcyr frpher, naq gb n ynetr
ynaq: sbe Tbq ungu tvira vg vagb lbhe unaqf; n cynpr jurer gurer vf ab
jnag bs nal guvat gung vf va gur rnegu.

18:11 Naq gurer jrag sebz gurapr bs gur snzvyl bs gur Qnavgrf, bhg bs
Mbenu naq bhg bs Rfugnby, fvk uhaqerq zra nccbvagrq jvgu jrncbaf bs
jne.

18:12 Naq gurl jrag hc, naq cvgpurq va Xvewnguwrnevz, va Whqnu:
jurersber gurl pnyyrq gung cynpr Znunaruqna hagb guvf qnl: orubyq, vg
vf oruvaq Xvewnguwrnevz.

18:13 Naq gurl cnffrq gurapr hagb zbhag Rcuenvz, naq pnzr hagb gur
ubhfr bs Zvpnu.

18:14 Gura nafjrerq gur svir zra gung jrag gb fcl bhg gur pbhagel bs
Ynvfu, naq fnvq hagb gurve oerguera, Qb lr xabj gung gurer vf va gurfr
ubhfrf na rcubq, naq grencuvz, naq n tenira vzntr, naq n zbygra vzntr?
abj gurersber pbafvqre jung lr unir gb qb.

18:15 Naq gurl ghearq guvgurejneq, naq pnzr gb gur ubhfr bs gur lbhat
zna gur Yrivgr, rira hagb gur ubhfr bs Zvpnu, naq fnyhgrq uvz.

18:16 Naq gur fvk uhaqerq zra nccbvagrq jvgu gurve jrncbaf bs jne,
juvpu jrer bs gur puvyqera bs Qna, fgbbq ol gur ragrevat bs gur tngr.

18:17 Naq gur svir zra gung jrag gb fcl bhg gur ynaq jrag hc, naq pnzr
va guvgure, naq gbbx gur tenira vzntr, naq gur rcubq, naq gur
grencuvz, naq gur zbygra vzntr: naq gur cevrfg fgbbq va gur ragrevat
bs gur tngr jvgu gur fvk uhaqerq zra gung jrer nccbvagrq jvgu jrncbaf
bs jne.

18:18 Naq gurfr jrag vagb Zvpnu'f ubhfr, naq srgpurq gur pneirq vzntr,
gur rcubq, naq gur grencuvz, naq gur zbygra vzntr. Gura fnvq gur
cevrfg hagb gurz, Jung qb lr?  18:19 Naq gurl fnvq hagb uvz, Ubyq gul
crnpr, ynl guvar unaq hcba gul zbhgu, naq tb jvgu hf, naq or gb hf n
sngure naq n cevrfg: vf vg orggre sbe gurr gb or n cevrfg hagb gur
ubhfr bs bar zna, be gung gubh or n cevrfg hagb n gevor naq n snzvyl
va Vfenry?  18:20 Naq gur cevrfg'f urneg jnf tynq, naq ur gbbx gur
rcubq, naq gur grencuvz, naq gur tenira vzntr, naq jrag va gur zvqfg
bs gur crbcyr.

18:21 Fb gurl ghearq naq qrcnegrq, naq chg gur yvggyr barf naq gur
pnggyr naq gur pneevntr orsber gurz.

18:22 Naq jura gurl jrer n tbbq jnl sebz gur ubhfr bs Zvpnu, gur zra
gung jrer va gur ubhfrf arne gb Zvpnu'f ubhfr jrer tngurerq gbtrgure,
naq biregbbx gur puvyqera bs Qna.

18:23 Naq gurl pevrq hagb gur puvyqera bs Qna. Naq gurl ghearq gurve
snprf, naq fnvq hagb Zvpnu, Jung nvyrgu gurr, gung gubh pbzrfg jvgu
fhpu n pbzcnal?  18:24 Naq ur fnvq, Lr unir gnxra njnl zl tbqf juvpu V
znqr, naq gur cevrfg, naq lr ner tbar njnl: naq jung unir V zber? naq
jung vf guvf gung lr fnl hagb zr, Jung nvyrgu gurr?  18:25 Naq gur
puvyqera bs Qna fnvq hagb uvz, Yrg abg gul ibvpr or urneq nzbat hf,
yrfg natel sryybjf eha hcba gurr, naq gubh ybfr gul yvsr, jvgu gur
yvirf bs gul ubhfrubyq.

18:26 Naq gur puvyqera bs Qna jrag gurve jnl: naq jura Zvpnu fnj gung
gurl jrer gbb fgebat sbe uvz, ur ghearq naq jrag onpx hagb uvf ubhfr.

18:27 Naq gurl gbbx gur guvatf juvpu Zvpnu unq znqr, naq gur cevrfg
juvpu ur unq, naq pnzr hagb Ynvfu, hagb n crbcyr gung jrer ng dhvrg
naq frpher: naq gurl fzbgr gurz jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq, naq oheag
gur pvgl jvgu sver.

18:28 Naq gurer jnf ab qryvirere, orpnhfr vg jnf sne sebz Mvqba, naq
gurl unq ab ohfvarff jvgu nal zna; naq vg jnf va gur inyyrl gung yvrgu
ol Orguerubo. Naq gurl ohvyg n pvgl, naq qjryg gurerva.

18:29 Naq gurl pnyyrq gur anzr bs gur pvgl Qna, nsgre gur anzr bs Qna
gurve sngure, jub jnf obea hagb Vfenry: ubjorvg gur anzr bs gur pvgl
jnf Ynvfu ng gur svefg.

18:30 Naq gur puvyqera bs Qna frg hc gur tenira vzntr: naq Wbanguna,
gur fba bs Trefubz, gur fba bs Znanffru, ur naq uvf fbaf jrer cevrfgf
gb gur gevor bs Qna hagvy gur qnl bs gur pncgvivgl bs gur ynaq.

18:31 Naq gurl frg gurz hc Zvpnu'f tenira vzntr, juvpu ur znqr, nyy
gur gvzr gung gur ubhfr bs Tbq jnf va Fuvybu.

19:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gubfr qnlf, jura gurer jnf ab xvat va
Vfenry, gung gurer jnf n pregnva Yrivgr fbwbheavat ba gur fvqr bs
zbhag Rcuenvz, jub gbbx gb uvz n pbaphovar bhg bs Orguyrurzwhqnu.

19:2 Naq uvf pbaphovar cynlrq gur juber ntnvafg uvz, naq jrag njnl
sebz uvz hagb ure sngure'f ubhfr gb Orguyrurzwhqnu, naq jnf gurer sbhe
jubyr zbaguf.

19:3 Naq ure uhfonaq nebfr, naq jrag nsgre ure, gb fcrnx sevraqyl hagb
ure, naq gb oevat ure ntnva, univat uvf freinag jvgu uvz, naq n pbhcyr
bs nffrf: naq fur oebhtug uvz vagb ure sngure'f ubhfr: naq jura gur
sngure bs gur qnzfry fnj uvz, ur erwbvprq gb zrrg uvz.

19:4 Naq uvf sngure va ynj, gur qnzfry'f sngure, ergnvarq uvz; naq ur
nobqr jvgu uvz guerr qnlf: fb gurl qvq rng naq qevax, naq ybqtrq
gurer.

19:5 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ba gur sbhegu qnl, jura gurl nebfr rneyl va
gur zbeavat, gung ur ebfr hc gb qrcneg: naq gur qnzfry'f sngure fnvq
hagb uvf fba va ynj, Pbzsbeg guvar urneg jvgu n zbefry bs oernq, naq
nsgrejneq tb lbhe jnl.

19:6 Naq gurl fng qbja, naq qvq rng naq qevax obgu bs gurz gbtrgure:
sbe gur qnzfry'f sngure unq fnvq hagb gur zna, Or pbagrag, V cenl
gurr, naq gneel nyy avtug, naq yrg guvar urneg or zreel.

19:7 Naq jura gur zna ebfr hc gb qrcneg, uvf sngure va ynj hetrq uvz:
gurersber ur ybqtrq gurer ntnva.

19:8 Naq ur nebfr rneyl va gur zbeavat ba gur svsgu qnl gb qrcneg; naq
gur qnzfry'f sngure fnvq, Pbzsbeg guvar urneg, V cenl gurr. Naq gurl
gneevrq hagvy nsgreabba, naq gurl qvq rng obgu bs gurz.

19:9 Naq jura gur zna ebfr hc gb qrcneg, ur, naq uvf pbaphovar, naq
uvf freinag, uvf sngure va ynj, gur qnzfry'f sngure, fnvq hagb uvz,
Orubyq, abj gur qnl qenjrgu gbjneq riravat, V cenl lbh gneel nyy
avtug: orubyq, gur qnl tebjrgu gb na raq, ybqtr urer, gung guvar urneg
znl or zreel; naq gb zbeebj trg lbh rneyl ba lbhe jnl, gung gubh
znlrfg tb ubzr.

19:10 Ohg gur zna jbhyq abg gneel gung avtug, ohg ur ebfr hc naq
qrcnegrq, naq pnzr bire ntnvafg Wrohf, juvpu vf Wrehfnyrz; naq gurer
jrer jvgu uvz gjb nffrf fnqqyrq, uvf pbaphovar nyfb jnf jvgu uvz.

19:11 Naq jura gurl jrer ol Wrohf, gur qnl jnf sne fcrag; naq gur
freinag fnvq hagb uvf znfgre, Pbzr, V cenl gurr, naq yrg hf ghea va
vagb guvf pvgl bs gur Wrohfvgrf, naq ybqtr va vg.

19:12 Naq uvf znfgre fnvq hagb uvz, Jr jvyy abg ghea nfvqr uvgure vagb
gur pvgl bs n fgenatre, gung vf abg bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry; jr jvyy
cnff bire gb Tvornu.

19:13 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvf freinag, Pbzr, naq yrg hf qenj arne gb bar
bs gurfr cynprf gb ybqtr nyy avtug, va Tvornu, be va Enznu.

19:14 Naq gurl cnffrq ba naq jrag gurve jnl; naq gur fha jrag qbja
hcba gurz jura gurl jrer ol Tvornu, juvpu orybatrgu gb Orawnzva.

19:15 Naq gurl ghearq nfvqr guvgure, gb tb va naq gb ybqtr va Tvornu:
naq jura ur jrag va, ur fng uvz qbja va n fgerrg bs gur pvgl: sbe
gurer jnf ab zna gung gbbx gurz vagb uvf ubhfr gb ybqtvat.

19:16 Naq, orubyq, gurer pnzr na byq zna sebz uvf jbex bhg bs gur
svryq ng rira, juvpu jnf nyfb bs zbhag Rcuenvz; naq ur fbwbhearq va
Tvornu: ohg gur zra bs gur cynpr jrer Orawnzvgrf.

19:17 Naq jura ur unq yvsgrq hc uvf rlrf, ur fnj n jnlsnevat zna va
gur fgerrg bs gur pvgl: naq gur byq zna fnvq, Juvgure tbrfg gubh? naq
jurapr pbzrfg gubh?  19:18 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Jr ner cnffvat sebz
Orguyrurzwhqnu gbjneq gur fvqr bs zbhag Rcuenvz; sebz gurapr nz V: naq
V jrag gb Orguyrurzwhqnu, ohg V nz abj tbvat gb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ;
naq gurer vf ab zna gung erprvirgu zr gb ubhfr.

19:19 Lrg gurer vf obgu fgenj naq cebiraqre sbe bhe nffrf; naq gurer
vf oernq naq jvar nyfb sbe zr, naq sbe gul unaqznvq, naq sbe gur lbhat
zna juvpu vf jvgu gul freinagf: gurer vf ab jnag bs nal guvat.

19:20 Naq gur byq zna fnvq, Crnpr or jvgu gurr; ubjfbrire yrg nyy gul
jnagf yvr hcba zr; bayl ybqtr abg va gur fgerrg.

19:21 Fb ur oebhtug uvz vagb uvf ubhfr, naq tnir cebiraqre hagb gur
nffrf: naq gurl jnfurq gurve srrg, naq qvq rng naq qevax.

19:22 Abj nf gurl jrer znxvat gurve urnegf zreel, orubyq, gur zra bs
gur pvgl, pregnva fbaf bs Oryvny, orfrg gur ubhfr ebhaq nobhg, naq
orng ng gur qbbe, naq fcnxr gb gur znfgre bs gur ubhfr, gur byq zna,
fnlvat, Oevat sbegu gur zna gung pnzr vagb guvar ubhfr, gung jr znl
xabj uvz.

19:23 Naq gur zna, gur znfgre bs gur ubhfr, jrag bhg hagb gurz, naq
fnvq hagb gurz, Anl, zl oerguera, anl, V cenl lbh, qb abg fb jvpxrqyl;
frrvat gung guvf zna vf pbzr vagb zvar ubhfr, qb abg guvf sbyyl.

19:24 Orubyq, urer vf zl qnhtugre n znvqra, naq uvf pbaphovar; gurz V
jvyy oevat bhg abj, naq uhzoyr lr gurz, naq qb jvgu gurz jung frrzrgu
tbbq hagb lbh: ohg hagb guvf zna qb abg fb ivyr n guvat.

19:25 Ohg gur zra jbhyq abg urnexra gb uvz: fb gur zna gbbx uvf
pbaphovar, naq oebhtug ure sbegu hagb gurz; naq gurl xarj ure, naq
nohfrq ure nyy gur avtug hagvy gur zbeavat: naq jura gur qnl ortna gb
fcevat, gurl yrg ure tb.

19:26 Gura pnzr gur jbzna va gur qnjavat bs gur qnl, naq sryy qbja ng
gur qbbe bs gur zna'f ubhfr jurer ure ybeq jnf, gvyy vg jnf yvtug.

19:27 Naq ure ybeq ebfr hc va gur zbeavat, naq bcrarq gur qbbef bs gur
ubhfr, naq jrag bhg gb tb uvf jnl: naq, orubyq, gur jbzna uvf
pbaphovar jnf snyyra qbja ng gur qbbe bs gur ubhfr, naq ure unaqf jrer
hcba gur guerfubyq.

19:28 Naq ur fnvq hagb ure, Hc, naq yrg hf or tbvat. Ohg abar
nafjrerq.

Gura gur zna gbbx ure hc hcba na nff, naq gur zna ebfr hc, naq tng uvz
hagb uvf cynpr.

19:29 Naq jura ur jnf pbzr vagb uvf ubhfr, ur gbbx n xavsr, naq ynvq
ubyq ba uvf pbaphovar, naq qvivqrq ure, gbtrgure jvgu ure obarf, vagb
gjryir cvrprf, naq frag ure vagb nyy gur pbnfgf bs Vfenry.

19:30 Naq vg jnf fb, gung nyy gung fnj vg fnvq, Gurer jnf ab fhpu qrrq
qbar abe frra sebz gur qnl gung gur puvyqera bs Vfenry pnzr hc bhg bs
gur ynaq bs Rtlcg hagb guvf qnl: pbafvqre bs vg, gnxr nqivpr, naq
fcrnx lbhe zvaqf.

20:1 Gura nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jrag bhg, naq gur pbatertngvba
jnf tngurerq gbtrgure nf bar zna, sebz Qna rira gb Orrefuron, jvgu gur
ynaq bs Tvyrnq, hagb gur YBEQ va Zvmcru.

20:2 Naq gur puvrs bs nyy gur crbcyr, rira bs nyy gur gevorf bs
Vfenry, cerfragrq gurzfryirf va gur nffrzoyl bs gur crbcyr bs Tbq,
sbhe uhaqerq gubhfnaq sbbgzra gung qerj fjbeq.

20:3 (Abj gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva urneq gung gur puvyqera bs Vfenry
jrer tbar hc gb Zvmcru.) Gura fnvq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, Gryy hf,
ubj jnf guvf jvpxrqarff?  20:4 Naq gur Yrivgr, gur uhfonaq bs gur
jbzna gung jnf fynva, nafjrerq naq fnvq, V pnzr vagb Tvornu gung
orybatrgu gb Orawnzva, V naq zl pbaphovar, gb ybqtr.

20:5 Naq gur zra bs Tvornu ebfr ntnvafg zr, naq orfrg gur ubhfr ebhaq
nobhg hcba zr ol avtug, naq gubhtug gb unir fynva zr: naq zl pbaphovar
unir gurl sbeprq, gung fur vf qrnq.

20:6 Naq V gbbx zl pbaphovar, naq phg ure va cvrprf, naq frag ure
guebhtubhg nyy gur pbhagel bs gur vaurevgnapr bs Vfenry: sbe gurl unir
pbzzvggrq yrjqarff naq sbyyl va Vfenry.

20:7 Orubyq, lr ner nyy puvyqera bs Vfenry; tvir urer lbhe nqivpr naq
pbhafry.

20:8 Naq nyy gur crbcyr nebfr nf bar zna, fnlvat, Jr jvyy abg nal bs
hf tb gb uvf grag, arvgure jvyy jr nal bs hf ghea vagb uvf ubhfr.

20:9 Ohg abj guvf funyy or gur guvat juvpu jr jvyy qb gb Tvornu; jr
jvyy tb hc ol ybg ntnvafg vg; 20:10 Naq jr jvyy gnxr gra zra bs na
uhaqerq guebhtubhg nyy gur gevorf bs Vfenry, naq na uhaqerq bs n
gubhfnaq, naq n gubhfnaq bhg bs gra gubhfnaq, gb srgpu ivpghny sbe gur
crbcyr, gung gurl znl qb, jura gurl pbzr gb Tvornu bs Orawnzva,
nppbeqvat gb nyy gur sbyyl gung gurl unir jebhtug va Vfenry.

20:11 Fb nyy gur zra bs Vfenry jrer tngurerq ntnvafg gur pvgl, xavg
gbtrgure nf bar zna.

20:12 Naq gur gevorf bs Vfenry frag zra guebhtu nyy gur gevor bs
Orawnzva, fnlvat, Jung jvpxrqarff vf guvf gung vf qbar nzbat lbh?
20:13 Abj gurersber qryvire hf gur zra, gur puvyqera bs Oryvny, juvpu
ner va Tvornu, gung jr znl chg gurz gb qrngu, naq chg njnl rivy sebz
Vfenry. Ohg gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva jbhyq abg urnexra gb gur ibvpr bs
gurve oerguera gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

20:14 Ohg gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure bhg bs
gur pvgvrf hagb Tvornu, gb tb bhg gb onggyr ntnvafg gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry.

20:15 Naq gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva jrer ahzorerq ng gung gvzr bhg bs
gur pvgvrf gjragl naq fvk gubhfnaq zra gung qerj fjbeq, orfvqr gur
vaunovgnagf bs Tvornu, juvpu jrer ahzorerq frira uhaqerq pubfra zra.

20:16 Nzbat nyy guvf crbcyr gurer jrer frira uhaqerq pubfra zra
yrsgunaqrq; rirel bar pbhyq fyvat fgbarf ng na unve oernqgu, naq abg
zvff.

20:17 Naq gur zra bs Vfenry, orfvqr Orawnzva, jrer ahzorerq sbhe
uhaqerq gubhfnaq zra gung qerj fjbeq: nyy gurfr jrer zra bs jne.

20:18 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry nebfr, naq jrag hc gb gur ubhfr bs
Tbq, naq nfxrq pbhafry bs Tbq, naq fnvq, Juvpu bs hf funyy tb hc svefg
gb gur onggyr ntnvafg gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva? Naq gur YBEQ fnvq,
Whqnu funyy tb hc svefg.

20:19 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry ebfr hc va gur zbeavat, naq rapnzcrq
ntnvafg Tvornu.

20:20 Naq gur zra bs Vfenry jrag bhg gb onggyr ntnvafg Orawnzva; naq
gur zra bs Vfenry chg gurzfryirf va neenl gb svtug ntnvafg gurz ng
Tvornu.

20:21 Naq gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva pnzr sbegu bhg bs Tvornu, naq
qrfgeblrq qbja gb gur tebhaq bs gur Vfenryvgrf gung qnl gjragl naq gjb
gubhfnaq zra.

20:22 Naq gur crbcyr gur zra bs Vfenry rapbhentrq gurzfryirf, naq frg
gurve onggyr ntnva va neenl va gur cynpr jurer gurl chg gurzfryirf va
neenl gur svefg qnl.

20:23 (Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jrag hc naq jrcg orsber gur YBEQ
hagvy rira, naq nfxrq pbhafry bs gur YBEQ, fnlvat, Funyy V tb hc ntnva
gb onggyr ntnvafg gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva zl oebgure? Naq gur YBEQ
fnvq, Tb hc ntnvafg uvz.)  20:24 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry pnzr arne
ntnvafg gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva gur frpbaq qnl.

20:25 Naq Orawnzva jrag sbegu ntnvafg gurz bhg bs Tvornu gur frpbaq
qnl, naq qrfgeblrq qbja gb gur tebhaq bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry ntnva
rvtugrra gubhfnaq zra; nyy gurfr qerj gur fjbeq.

20:26 Gura nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq nyy gur crbcyr, jrag hc,
naq pnzr hagb gur ubhfr bs Tbq, naq jrcg, naq fng gurer orsber gur
YBEQ, naq snfgrq gung qnl hagvy rira, naq bssrerq oheag bssrevatf naq
crnpr bssrevatf orsber gur YBEQ.

20:27 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry radhverq bs gur YBEQ, (sbe gur nex bs
gur pbiranag bs Tbq jnf gurer va gubfr qnlf, 20:28 Naq Cuvarunf, gur
fba bs Ryrnmne, gur fba bs Nneba, fgbbq orsber vg va gubfr qnlf,)
fnlvat, Funyy V lrg ntnva tb bhg gb onggyr ntnvafg gur puvyqera bs
Orawnzva zl oebgure, be funyy V prnfr? Naq gur YBEQ fnvq, Tb hc; sbe
gb zbeebj V jvyy qryvire gurz vagb guvar unaq.

20:29 Naq Vfenry frg yvref va jnvg ebhaq nobhg Tvornu.

20:30 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jrag hc ntnvafg gur puvyqera bs
Orawnzva ba gur guveq qnl, naq chg gurzfryirf va neenl ntnvafg Tvornu,
nf ng bgure gvzrf.

20:31 Naq gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva jrag bhg ntnvafg gur crbcyr, naq
jrer qenja njnl sebz gur pvgl; naq gurl ortna gb fzvgr bs gur crbcyr,
naq xvyy, nf ng bgure gvzrf, va gur uvtujnlf, bs juvpu bar tbrgu hc gb
gur ubhfr bs Tbq, naq gur bgure gb Tvornu va gur svryq, nobhg guvegl
zra bs Vfenry.

20:32 Naq gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva fnvq, Gurl ner fzvggra qbja orsber
hf, nf ng gur svefg. Ohg gur puvyqera bs Vfenry fnvq, Yrg hf syrr, naq
qenj gurz sebz gur pvgl hagb gur uvtujnlf.

20:33 Naq nyy gur zra bs Vfenry ebfr hc bhg bs gurve cynpr, naq chg
gurzfryirf va neenl ng Onnygnzne: naq gur yvref va jnvg bs Vfenry pnzr
sbegu bhg bs gurve cynprf, rira bhg bs gur zrnqbjf bs Tvornu.

20:34 Naq gurer pnzr ntnvafg Tvornu gra gubhfnaq pubfra zra bhg bs nyy
Vfenry, naq gur onggyr jnf fber: ohg gurl xarj abg gung rivy jnf arne
gurz.

20:35 Naq gur YBEQ fzbgr Orawnzva orsber Vfenry: naq gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry qrfgeblrq bs gur Orawnzvgrf gung qnl gjragl naq svir gubhfnaq
naq na uhaqerq zra: nyy gurfr qerj gur fjbeq.

20:36 Fb gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva fnj gung gurl jrer fzvggra: sbe gur
zra bs Vfenry tnir cynpr gb gur Orawnzvgrf, orpnhfr gurl gehfgrq hagb
gur yvref va jnvg juvpu gurl unq frg orfvqr Tvornu.

20:37 Naq gur yvref va jnvg unfgrq, naq ehfurq hcba Tvornu; naq gur
yvref va jnvg qerj gurzfryirf nybat, naq fzbgr nyy gur pvgl jvgu gur
rqtr bs gur fjbeq.

20:38 Abj gurer jnf na nccbvagrq fvta orgjrra gur zra bs Vfenry naq
gur yvref va jnvg, gung gurl fubhyq znxr n terng synzr jvgu fzbxr evfr
hc bhg bs gur pvgl.

20:39 Naq jura gur zra bs Vfenry ergverq va gur onggyr, Orawnzva ortna
gb fzvgr naq xvyy bs gur zra bs Vfenry nobhg guvegl crefbaf: sbe gurl
fnvq, Fheryl gurl ner fzvggra qbja orsber hf, nf va gur svefg onggyr.

20:40 Ohg jura gur synzr ortna gb nevfr hc bhg bs gur pvgl jvgu n
cvyyne bs fzbxr, gur Orawnzvgrf ybbxrq oruvaq gurz, naq, orubyq, gur
synzr bs gur pvgl nfpraqrq hc gb urnira.

20:41 Naq jura gur zra bs Vfenry ghearq ntnva, gur zra bs Orawnzva
jrer nznmrq: sbe gurl fnj gung rivy jnf pbzr hcba gurz.

20:42 Gurersber gurl ghearq gurve onpxf orsber gur zra bs Vfenry hagb
gur jnl bs gur jvyqrearff; ohg gur onggyr biregbbx gurz; naq gurz
juvpu pnzr bhg bs gur pvgvrf gurl qrfgeblrq va gur zvqfg bs gurz.

20:43 Guhf gurl vapybfrq gur Orawnzvgrf ebhaq nobhg, naq punfrq gurz,
naq gebqr gurz qbja jvgu rnfr bire ntnvafg Tvornu gbjneq gur
fhaevfvat.

20:44 Naq gurer sryy bs Orawnzva rvtugrra gubhfnaq zra; nyy gurfr jrer
zra bs inybhe.

20:45 Naq gurl ghearq naq syrq gbjneq gur jvyqrearff hagb gur ebpx bs
Evzzba: naq gurl tyrnarq bs gurz va gur uvtujnlf svir gubhfnaq zra;
naq chefhrq uneq nsgre gurz hagb Tvqbz, naq fyrj gjb gubhfnaq zra bs
gurz.

20:46 Fb gung nyy juvpu sryy gung qnl bs Orawnzva jrer gjragl naq svir
gubhfnaq zra gung qerj gur fjbeq; nyy gurfr jrer zra bs inybhe.

20:47 Ohg fvk uhaqerq zra ghearq naq syrq gb gur jvyqrearff hagb gur
ebpx Evzzba, naq nobqr va gur ebpx Evzzba sbhe zbaguf.

20:48 Naq gur zra bs Vfenry ghearq ntnva hcba gur puvyqera bs
Orawnzva, naq fzbgr gurz jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq, nf jryy gur zra
bs rirel pvgl, nf gur ornfg, naq nyy gung pnzr gb unaq: nyfb gurl frg
ba sver nyy gur pvgvrf gung gurl pnzr gb.

21:1 Abj gur zra bs Vfenry unq fjbea va Zvmcru, fnlvat, Gurer funyy
abg nal bs hf tvir uvf qnhtugre hagb Orawnzva gb jvsr.

21:2 Naq gur crbcyr pnzr gb gur ubhfr bs Tbq, naq nobqr gurer gvyy
rira orsber Tbq, naq yvsgrq hc gurve ibvprf, naq jrcg fber; 21:3 Naq
fnvq, B YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, jul vf guvf pbzr gb cnff va Vfenry, gung
gurer fubhyq or gb qnl bar gevor ynpxvat va Vfenry?  21:4 Naq vg pnzr
gb cnff ba gur zbeebj, gung gur crbcyr ebfr rneyl, naq ohvyg gurer na
nygne, naq bssrerq oheag bssrevatf naq crnpr bssrevatf.

21:5 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry fnvq, Jub vf gurer nzbat nyy gur
gevorf bs Vfenry gung pnzr abg hc jvgu gur pbatertngvba hagb gur YBEQ?
Sbe gurl unq znqr n terng bngu pbapreavat uvz gung pnzr abg hc gb gur
YBEQ gb Zvmcru, fnlvat, Ur funyy fheryl or chg gb qrngu.

21:6 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry ercragrq gurz sbe Orawnzva gurve
oebgure, naq fnvq, Gurer vf bar gevor phg bss sebz Vfenry guvf qnl.

21:7 Ubj funyy jr qb sbe jvirf sbe gurz gung erznva, frrvat jr unir
fjbea ol gur YBEQ gung jr jvyy abg tvir gurz bs bhe qnhtugref gb
jvirf?  21:8 Naq gurl fnvq, Jung bar vf gurer bs gur gevorf bs Vfenry
gung pnzr abg hc gb Zvmcru gb gur YBEQ? Naq, orubyq, gurer pnzr abar
gb gur pnzc sebz Wnorfutvyrnq gb gur nffrzoyl.

21:9 Sbe gur crbcyr jrer ahzorerq, naq, orubyq, gurer jrer abar bs gur
vaunovgnagf bs Wnorfutvyrnq gurer.

21:10 Naq gur pbatertngvba frag guvgure gjryir gubhfnaq zra bs gur
inyvnagrfg, naq pbzznaqrq gurz, fnlvat, Tb naq fzvgr gur vaunovgnagf
bs Wnorfutvyrnq jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq, jvgu gur jbzra naq gur
puvyqera.

21:11 Naq guvf vf gur guvat gung lr funyy qb, Lr funyy hggreyl qrfgebl
rirel znyr, naq rirel jbzna gung ungu ynva ol zna.

21:12 Naq gurl sbhaq nzbat gur vaunovgnagf bs Wnorfutvyrnq sbhe
uhaqerq lbhat ivetvaf, gung unq xabja ab zna ol ylvat jvgu nal znyr:
naq gurl oebhtug gurz hagb gur pnzc gb Fuvybu, juvpu vf va gur ynaq bs
Pnanna.

21:13 Naq gur jubyr pbatertngvba frag fbzr gb fcrnx gb gur puvyqera bs
Orawnzva gung jrer va gur ebpx Evzzba, naq gb pnyy crnprnoyl hagb
gurz.

21:14 Naq Orawnzva pnzr ntnva ng gung gvzr; naq gurl tnir gurz jvirf
juvpu gurl unq fnirq nyvir bs gur jbzra bs Wnorfutvyrnq: naq lrg fb
gurl fhssvprq gurz abg.

21:15 Naq gur crbcyr ercragrq gurz sbe Orawnzva, orpnhfr gung gur YBEQ
unq znqr n oernpu va gur gevorf bs Vfenry.

21:16 Gura gur ryqref bs gur pbatertngvba fnvq, Ubj funyy jr qb sbe
jvirf sbe gurz gung erznva, frrvat gur jbzra ner qrfgeblrq bhg bs
Orawnzva?  21:17 Naq gurl fnvq, Gurer zhfg or na vaurevgnapr sbe gurz
gung or rfpncrq bs Orawnzva, gung n gevor or abg qrfgeblrq bhg bs
Vfenry.

21:18 Ubjorvg jr znl abg tvir gurz jvirf bs bhe qnhtugref: sbe gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry unir fjbea, fnlvat, Phefrq or ur gung tvirgu n jvsr
gb Orawnzva.

21:19 Gura gurl fnvq, Orubyq, gurer vf n srnfg bs gur YBEQ va Fuvybu
lrneyl va n cynpr juvpu vf ba gur abegu fvqr bs Orgury, ba gur rnfg
fvqr bs gur uvtujnl gung tbrgu hc sebz Orgury gb Furpurz, naq ba gur
fbhgu bs Yrobanu.

21:20 Gurersber gurl pbzznaqrq gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva, fnlvat, Tb
naq yvr va jnvg va gur ivarlneqf; 21:21 Naq frr, naq, orubyq, vs gur
qnhtugref bs Fuvybu pbzr bhg gb qnapr va qnaprf, gura pbzr lr bhg bs
gur ivarlneqf, naq pngpu lbh rirel zna uvf jvsr bs gur qnhtugref bs
Fuvybu, naq tb gb gur ynaq bs Orawnzva.

21:22 Naq vg funyy or, jura gurve snguref be gurve oerguera pbzr hagb
hf gb pbzcynva, gung jr jvyy fnl hagb gurz, Or snibhenoyr hagb gurz
sbe bhe fnxrf: orpnhfr jr erfreirq abg gb rnpu zna uvf jvsr va gur
jne: sbe lr qvq abg tvir hagb gurz ng guvf gvzr, gung lr fubhyq or
thvygl.

21:23 Naq gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva qvq fb, naq gbbx gurz jvirf,
nppbeqvat gb gurve ahzore, bs gurz gung qnaprq, jubz gurl pnhtug: naq
gurl jrag naq erghearq hagb gurve vaurevgnapr, naq ercnverq gur
pvgvrf, naq qjryg va gurz.

21:24 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qrcnegrq gurapr ng gung gvzr, rirel
zna gb uvf gevor naq gb uvf snzvyl, naq gurl jrag bhg sebz gurapr
rirel zna gb uvf vaurevgnapr.

21:25 Va gubfr qnlf gurer jnf ab xvat va Vfenry: rirel zna qvq gung
juvpu jnf evtug va uvf bja rlrf.




Gur Obbx bs Ehgu


1:1 Abj vg pnzr gb cnff va gur qnlf jura gur whqtrf ehyrq, gung gurer
jnf n snzvar va gur ynaq. Naq n pregnva zna bs Orguyrurzwhqnu jrag gb
fbwbhea va gur pbhagel bs Zbno, ur, naq uvf jvsr, naq uvf gjb fbaf.

1:2 Naq gur anzr bs gur zna jnf Ryvzryrpu, naq gur anzr bs uvf jvsr
Anbzv, naq gur anzr bs uvf gjb fbaf Znuyba naq Puvyvba, Rcuenguvgrf bs
Orguyrurzwhqnu. Naq gurl pnzr vagb gur pbhagel bs Zbno, naq pbagvahrq
gurer.

1:3 Naq Ryvzryrpu Anbzv'f uhfonaq qvrq; naq fur jnf yrsg, naq ure gjb
fbaf.

1:4 Naq gurl gbbx gurz jvirf bs gur jbzra bs Zbno; gur anzr bs gur bar
jnf Becnu, naq gur anzr bs gur bgure Ehgu: naq gurl qjryyrq gurer
nobhg gra lrnef.

1:5 Naq Znuyba naq Puvyvba qvrq nyfb obgu bs gurz; naq gur jbzna jnf
yrsg bs ure gjb fbaf naq ure uhfonaq.

1:6 Gura fur nebfr jvgu ure qnhtugref va ynj, gung fur zvtug erghea
sebz gur pbhagel bs Zbno: sbe fur unq urneq va gur pbhagel bs Zbno ubj
gung gur YBEQ unq ivfvgrq uvf crbcyr va tvivat gurz oernq.

1:7 Jurersber fur jrag sbegu bhg bs gur cynpr jurer fur jnf, naq ure
gjb qnhtugref va ynj jvgu ure; naq gurl jrag ba gur jnl gb erghea hagb
gur ynaq bs Whqnu.

1:8 Naq Anbzv fnvq hagb ure gjb qnhtugref va ynj, Tb, erghea rnpu gb
ure zbgure'f ubhfr: gur YBEQ qrny xvaqyl jvgu lbh, nf lr unir qrnyg
jvgu gur qrnq, naq jvgu zr.

1:9 Gur YBEQ tenag lbh gung lr znl svaq erfg, rnpu bs lbh va gur ubhfr
bs ure uhfonaq. Gura fur xvffrq gurz; naq gurl yvsgrq hc gurve ibvpr,
naq jrcg.

1:10 Naq gurl fnvq hagb ure, Fheryl jr jvyy erghea jvgu gurr hagb gul
crbcyr.

1:11 Naq Anbzv fnvq, Ghea ntnva, zl qnhtugref: jul jvyy lr tb jvgu zr?
ner gurer lrg nal zber fbaf va zl jbzo, gung gurl znl or lbhe
uhfonaqf?  1:12 Ghea ntnva, zl qnhtugref, tb lbhe jnl; sbe V nz gbb
byq gb unir na uhfonaq. Vs V fubhyq fnl, V unir ubcr, vs V fubhyq unir
na uhfonaq nyfb gb avtug, naq fubhyq nyfb orne fbaf; 1:13 Jbhyq lr
gneel sbe gurz gvyy gurl jrer tebja? jbhyq lr fgnl sbe gurz sebz
univat uhfonaqf? anl, zl qnhtugref; sbe vg tevrirgu zr zhpu sbe lbhe
fnxrf gung gur unaq bs gur YBEQ vf tbar bhg ntnvafg zr.

1:14 Naq gurl yvsgrq hc gurve ibvpr, naq jrcg ntnva: naq Becnu xvffrq
ure zbgure va ynj; ohg Ehgu pynir hagb ure.

1:15 Naq fur fnvq, Orubyq, gul fvfgre va ynj vf tbar onpx hagb ure
crbcyr, naq hagb ure tbqf: erghea gubh nsgre gul fvfgre va ynj.

1:16 Naq Ehgu fnvq, Vagerng zr abg gb yrnir gurr, be gb erghea sebz
sbyybjvat nsgre gurr: sbe juvgure gubh tbrfg, V jvyy tb; naq jurer
gubh ybqtrfg, V jvyy ybqtr: gul crbcyr funyy or zl crbcyr, naq gul Tbq
zl Tbq: 1:17 Jurer gubh qvrfg, jvyy V qvr, naq gurer jvyy V or ohevrq:
gur YBEQ qb fb gb zr, naq zber nyfb, vs bhtug ohg qrngu cneg gurr naq
zr.

1:18 Jura fur fnj gung fur jnf fgrqsnfgyl zvaqrq gb tb jvgu ure, gura
fur yrsg fcrnxvat hagb ure.

1:19 Fb gurl gjb jrag hagvy gurl pnzr gb Orguyrurz. Naq vg pnzr gb
cnff, jura gurl jrer pbzr gb Orguyrurz, gung nyy gur pvgl jnf zbirq
nobhg gurz, naq gurl fnvq, Vf guvf Anbzv?  1:20 Naq fur fnvq hagb
gurz, Pnyy zr abg Anbzv, pnyy zr Znen: sbe gur Nyzvtugl ungu qrnyg
irel ovggreyl jvgu zr.

1:21 V jrag bhg shyy naq gur YBEQ ungu oebhtug zr ubzr ntnva rzcgl:
jul gura pnyy lr zr Anbzv, frrvat gur YBEQ ungu grfgvsvrq ntnvafg zr,
naq gur Nyzvtugl ungu nssyvpgrq zr?  1:22 Fb Anbzv erghearq, naq Ehgu
gur Zbnovgrff, ure qnhtugre va ynj, jvgu ure, juvpu erghearq bhg bs
gur pbhagel bs Zbno: naq gurl pnzr gb Orguyrurz va gur ortvaavat bs
oneyrl uneirfg.

2:1 Naq Anbzv unq n xvafzna bs ure uhfonaq'f, n zvtugl zna bs jrnygu,
bs gur snzvyl bs Ryvzryrpu; naq uvf anzr jnf Obnm.

2:2 Naq Ehgu gur Zbnovgrff fnvq hagb Anbzv, Yrg zr abj tb gb gur
svryq, naq tyrna rnef bs pbea nsgre uvz va jubfr fvtug V funyy svaq
tenpr.

Naq fur fnvq hagb ure, Tb, zl qnhtugre.

2:3 Naq fur jrag, naq pnzr, naq tyrnarq va gur svryq nsgre gur
erncref: naq ure unc jnf gb yvtug ba n cneg bs gur svryq orybatvat
hagb Obnm, jub jnf bs gur xvaqerq bs Ryvzryrpu.

2:4 Naq, orubyq, Obnm pnzr sebz Orguyrurz, naq fnvq hagb gur erncref,
Gur YBEQ or jvgu lbh. Naq gurl nafjrerq uvz, Gur YBEQ oyrff gurr.

2:5 Gura fnvq Obnm hagb uvf freinag gung jnf frg bire gur erncref,
Jubfr qnzfry vf guvf?  2:6 Naq gur freinag gung jnf frg bire gur
erncref nafjrerq naq fnvq, Vg vf gur Zbnovgvfu qnzfry gung pnzr onpx
jvgu Anbzv bhg bs gur pbhagel bs Zbno: 2:7 Naq fur fnvq, V cenl lbh,
yrg zr tyrna naq tngure nsgre gur erncref nzbat gur furnirf: fb fur
pnzr, naq ungu pbagvahrq rira sebz gur zbeavat hagvy abj, gung fur
gneevrq n yvggyr va gur ubhfr.

2:8 Gura fnvq Obnm hagb Ehgu, Urnerfg gubh abg, zl qnhtugre? Tb abg gb
tyrna va nabgure svryq, arvgure tb sebz urapr, ohg novqr urer snfg ol
zl znvqraf: 2:9 Yrg guvar rlrf or ba gur svryq gung gurl qb ernc, naq
tb gubh nsgre gurz: unir V abg punetrq gur lbhat zra gung gurl funyy
abg gbhpu gurr? naq jura gubh neg nguvefg, tb hagb gur irffryf, naq
qevax bs gung juvpu gur lbhat zra unir qenja.

2:10 Gura fur sryy ba ure snpr, naq objrq urefrys gb gur tebhaq, naq
fnvq hagb uvz, Jul unir V sbhaq tenpr va guvar rlrf, gung gubh
fubhyqrfg gnxr xabjyrqtr bs zr, frrvat V nz n fgenatre?  2:11 Naq Obnm
nafjrerq naq fnvq hagb ure, Vg ungu shyyl orra furjrq zr, nyy gung
gubh unfg qbar hagb gul zbgure va ynj fvapr gur qrngu bs guvar
uhfonaq: naq ubj gubh unfg yrsg gul sngure naq gul zbgure, naq gur
ynaq bs gul angvivgl, naq neg pbzr hagb n crbcyr juvpu gubh xarjrfg
abg urergbsber.

2:12 Gur YBEQ erpbzcrafr gul jbex, naq n shyy erjneq or tvira gurr bs
gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, haqre jubfr jvatf gubh neg pbzr gb gehfg.

2:13 Gura fur fnvq, Yrg zr svaq snibhe va gul fvtug, zl ybeq; sbe gung
gubh unfg pbzsbegrq zr, naq sbe gung gubh unfg fcbxra sevraqyl hagb
guvar unaqznvq, gubhtu V or abg yvxr hagb bar bs guvar unaqznvqraf.

2:14 Naq Obnm fnvq hagb ure, Ng zrnygvzr pbzr gubh uvgure, naq rng bs
gur oernq, naq qvc gul zbefry va gur ivartne. Naq fur fng orfvqr gur
erncref: naq ur ernpurq ure cnepurq pbea, naq fur qvq rng, naq jnf
fhssvprq, naq yrsg.

2:15 Naq jura fur jnf evfra hc gb tyrna, Obnm pbzznaqrq uvf lbhat zra,
fnlvat, Yrg ure tyrna rira nzbat gur furnirf, naq ercebnpu ure abg:
2:16 Naq yrg snyy nyfb fbzr bs gur unaqshyf bs checbfr sbe ure, naq
yrnir gurz, gung fur znl tyrna gurz, naq erohxr ure abg.

2:17 Fb fur tyrnarq va gur svryq hagvy rira, naq orng bhg gung fur unq
tyrnarq: naq vg jnf nobhg na rcunu bs oneyrl.

2:18 Naq fur gbbx vg hc, naq jrag vagb gur pvgl: naq ure zbgure va ynj
fnj jung fur unq tyrnarq: naq fur oebhtug sbegu, naq tnir gb ure gung
fur unq erfreirq nsgre fur jnf fhssvprq.

2:19 Naq ure zbgure va ynj fnvq hagb ure, Jurer unfg gubh tyrnarq gb
qnl?  naq jurer jebhtugrfg gubh? oyrffrq or ur gung qvq gnxr xabjyrqtr
bs gurr. Naq fur furjrq ure zbgure va ynj jvgu jubz fur unq jebhtug,
naq fnvq, Gur zna'f anzr jvgu jubz V jebhtug gb qnl vf Obnm.

2:20 Naq Anbzv fnvq hagb ure qnhtugre va ynj, Oyrffrq or ur bs gur
YBEQ, jub ungu abg yrsg bss uvf xvaqarff gb gur yvivat naq gb gur
qrnq. Naq Anbzv fnvq hagb ure, Gur zna vf arne bs xva hagb hf, bar bs
bhe arkg xvafzra.

2:21 Naq Ehgu gur Zbnovgrff fnvq, Ur fnvq hagb zr nyfb, Gubh funyg
xrrc snfg ol zl lbhat zra, hagvy gurl unir raqrq nyy zl uneirfg.

2:22 Naq Anbzv fnvq hagb Ehgu ure qnhtugre va ynj, Vg vf tbbq, zl
qnhtugre, gung gubh tb bhg jvgu uvf znvqraf, gung gurl zrrg gurr abg
va nal bgure svryq.

2:23 Fb fur xrcg snfg ol gur znvqraf bs Obnm gb tyrna hagb gur raq bs
oneyrl uneirfg naq bs jurng uneirfg; naq qjryg jvgu ure zbgure va ynj.

3:1 Gura Anbzv ure zbgure va ynj fnvq hagb ure, Zl qnhtugre, funyy V
abg frrx erfg sbe gurr, gung vg znl or jryy jvgu gurr?  3:2 Naq abj vf
abg Obnm bs bhe xvaqerq, jvgu jubfr znvqraf gubh jnfg?  Orubyq, ur
jvaabjrgu oneyrl gb avtug va gur guerfuvatsybbe.

3:3 Jnfu gulfrys gurersber, naq nabvag gurr, naq chg gul envzrag hcba
gurr, naq trg gurr qbja gb gur sybbe: ohg znxr abg gulfrys xabja hagb
gur zna, hagvy ur funyy unir qbar rngvat naq qevaxvat.

3:4 Naq vg funyy or, jura ur yvrgu qbja, gung gubh funyg znex gur
cynpr jurer ur funyy yvr, naq gubh funyg tb va, naq hapbire uvf srrg,
naq ynl gurr qbja; naq ur jvyy gryy gurr jung gubh funyg qb.

3:5 Naq fur fnvq hagb ure, Nyy gung gubh fnlrfg hagb zr V jvyy qb.

3:6 Naq fur jrag qbja hagb gur sybbe, naq qvq nppbeqvat gb nyy gung
ure zbgure va ynj onqr ure.

3:7 Naq jura Obnm unq rngra naq qehax, naq uvf urneg jnf zreel, ur
jrag gb yvr qbja ng gur raq bs gur urnc bs pbea: naq fur pnzr fbsgyl,
naq hapbirerq uvf srrg, naq ynvq ure qbja.

3:8 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng zvqavtug, gung gur zna jnf nsenvq, naq
ghearq uvzfrys: naq, orubyq, n jbzna ynl ng uvf srrg.

3:9 Naq ur fnvq, Jub neg gubh? Naq fur nafjrerq, V nz Ehgu guvar
unaqznvq: fcernq gurersber gul fxveg bire guvar unaqznvq; sbe gubh neg
n arne xvafzna.

3:10 Naq ur fnvq, Oyrffrq or gubh bs gur YBEQ, zl qnhtugre: sbe gubh
unfg furjrq zber xvaqarff va gur ynggre raq guna ng gur ortvaavat,
vanfzhpu nf gubh sbyybjrqfg abg lbhat zra, jurgure cbbe be evpu.

3:11 Naq abj, zl qnhtugre, srne abg; V jvyy qb gb gurr nyy gung gubh
erdhverfg: sbe nyy gur pvgl bs zl crbcyr qbgu xabj gung gubh neg n
iveghbhf jbzna.

3:12 Naq abj vg vf gehr gung V nz gul arne xvafzna: ubjorvg gurer vf n
xvafzna arnere guna V.

3:13 Gneel guvf avtug, naq vg funyy or va gur zbeavat, gung vs ur jvyy
cresbez hagb gurr gur cneg bs n xvafzna, jryy; yrg uvz qb gur
xvafzna'f cneg: ohg vs ur jvyy abg qb gur cneg bs n xvafzna gb gurr,
gura jvyy V qb gur cneg bs n xvafzna gb gurr, nf gur YBEQ yvirgu: yvr
qbja hagvy gur zbeavat.

3:14 Naq fur ynl ng uvf srrg hagvy gur zbeavat: naq fur ebfr hc orsber
bar pbhyq xabj nabgure. Naq ur fnvq, Yrg vg abg or xabja gung n jbzna
pnzr vagb gur sybbe.

3:15 Nyfb ur fnvq, Oevat gur invy gung gubh unfg hcba gurr, naq ubyq
vg.

Naq jura fur uryq vg, ur zrnfherq fvk zrnfherf bs oneyrl, naq ynvq vg
ba ure: naq fur jrag vagb gur pvgl.

3:16 Naq jura fur pnzr gb ure zbgure va ynj, fur fnvq, Jub neg gubh,
zl qnhtugre? Naq fur gbyq ure nyy gung gur zna unq qbar gb ure.

3:17 Naq fur fnvq, Gurfr fvk zrnfherf bs oneyrl tnir ur zr; sbe ur
fnvq gb zr, Tb abg rzcgl hagb gul zbgure va ynj.

3:18 Gura fnvq fur, Fvg fgvyy, zl qnhtugre, hagvy gubh xabj ubj gur
znggre jvyy snyy: sbe gur zna jvyy abg or va erfg, hagvy ur unir
svavfurq gur guvat guvf qnl.

4:1 Gura jrag Obnm hc gb gur tngr, naq fng uvz qbja gurer: naq,
orubyq, gur xvafzna bs jubz Obnm fcnxr pnzr ol; hagb jubz ur fnvq, Ub,
fhpu n bar! ghea nfvqr, fvg qbja urer. Naq ur ghearq nfvqr, naq fng
qbja.

4:2 Naq ur gbbx gra zra bs gur ryqref bs gur pvgl, naq fnvq, Fvg lr
qbja urer. Naq gurl fng qbja.

4:3 Naq ur fnvq hagb gur xvafzna, Anbzv, gung vf pbzr ntnva bhg bs gur
pbhagel bs Zbno, fryyrgu n cnepry bs ynaq, juvpu jnf bhe oebgure
Ryvzryrpu'f: 4:4 Naq V gubhtug gb nqiregvfr gurr, fnlvat, Ohl vg
orsber gur vaunovgnagf, naq orsber gur ryqref bs zl crbcyr. Vs gubh
jvyg erqrrz vg, erqrrz vg: ohg vs gubh jvyg abg erqrrz vg, gura gryy
zr, gung V znl xabj: sbe gurer vf abar gb erqrrz vg orfvqr gurr; naq V
nz nsgre gurr. Naq ur fnvq, V jvyy erqrrz vg.

4:5 Gura fnvq Obnm, Jung qnl gubh ohlrfg gur svryq bs gur unaq bs
Anbzv, gubh zhfg ohl vg nyfb bs Ehgu gur Zbnovgrff, gur jvsr bs gur
qrnq, gb envfr hc gur anzr bs gur qrnq hcba uvf vaurevgnapr.

4:6 Naq gur xvafzna fnvq, V pnaabg erqrrz vg sbe zlfrys, yrfg V zne
zvar bja vaurevgnapr: erqrrz gubh zl evtug gb gulfrys; sbe V pnaabg
erqrrz vg.

4:7 Abj guvf jnf gur znaare va sbezre gvzr va Vfenry pbapreavat
erqrrzvat naq pbapreavat punatvat, sbe gb pbasvez nyy guvatf; n zna
cyhpxrq bss uvf fubr, naq tnir vg gb uvf arvtuobhe: naq guvf jnf n
grfgvzbal va Vfenry.

4:8 Gurersber gur xvafzna fnvq hagb Obnm, Ohl vg sbe gurr. Fb ur qerj
bss uvf fubr.

4:9 Naq Obnm fnvq hagb gur ryqref, naq hagb nyy gur crbcyr, Lr ner
jvgarffrf guvf qnl, gung V unir obhtug nyy gung jnf Ryvzryrpu'f, naq
nyy gung jnf Puvyvba'f naq Znuyba'f, bs gur unaq bs Anbzv.

4:10 Zberbire Ehgu gur Zbnovgrff, gur jvsr bs Znuyba, unir V chepunfrq
gb or zl jvsr, gb envfr hc gur anzr bs gur qrnq hcba uvf vaurevgnapr,
gung gur anzr bs gur qrnq or abg phg bss sebz nzbat uvf oerguera, naq
sebz gur tngr bs uvf cynpr: lr ner jvgarffrf guvf qnl.

4:11 Naq nyy gur crbcyr gung jrer va gur tngr, naq gur ryqref, fnvq,
Jr ner jvgarffrf. Gur YBEQ znxr gur jbzna gung vf pbzr vagb guvar
ubhfr yvxr Enpury naq yvxr Yrnu, juvpu gjb qvq ohvyq gur ubhfr bs
Vfenry: naq qb gubh jbeguvyl va Rcuengnu, naq or snzbhf va Orguyrurz:
4:12 Naq yrg gul ubhfr or yvxr gur ubhfr bs Cunerm, jubz Gnzne oner
hagb Whqnu, bs gur frrq juvpu gur YBEQ funyy tvir gurr bs guvf lbhat
jbzna.

4:13 Fb Obnm gbbx Ehgu, naq fur jnf uvf jvsr: naq jura ur jrag va hagb
ure, gur YBEQ tnir ure pbaprcgvba, naq fur oner n fba.

4:14 Naq gur jbzra fnvq hagb Anbzv, Oyrffrq or gur YBEQ, juvpu ungu
abg yrsg gurr guvf qnl jvgubhg n xvafzna, gung uvf anzr znl or snzbhf
va Vfenry.

4:15 Naq ur funyy or hagb gurr n erfgbere bs gul yvsr, naq n abhevfure
bs guvar byq ntr: sbe gul qnhtugre va ynj, juvpu ybirgu gurr, juvpu vf
orggre gb gurr guna frira fbaf, ungu obea uvz.

4:16 Naq Anbzv gbbx gur puvyq, naq ynvq vg va ure obfbz, naq orpnzr
ahefr hagb vg.

4:17 Naq gur jbzra ure arvtuobhef tnir vg n anzr, fnlvat, Gurer vf n
fba obea gb Anbzv; naq gurl pnyyrq uvf anzr Borq: ur vf gur sngure bs
Wrffr, gur sngure bs Qnivq.

4:18 Abj gurfr ner gur trarengvbaf bs Cunerm: Cunerm ortng Urmeba,
4:19 Naq Urmeba ortng Enz, naq Enz ortng Nzzvanqno, 4:20 Naq Nzzvanqno
ortng Anufuba, naq Anufuba ortng Fnyzba, 4:21 Naq Fnyzba ortng Obnm,
naq Obnm ortng Borq, 4:22 Naq Borq ortng Wrffr, naq Wrffr ortng Qnivq.




Gur Svefg Obbx bs Fnzhry

Bgurejvfr Pnyyrq:

Gur Svefg Obbx bs gur Xvatf


1:1 Abj gurer jnf n pregnva zna bs Enzngunvzmbcuvz, bs zbhag Rcuenvz,
naq uvf anzr jnf Ryxnanu, gur fba bs Wrebunz, gur fba bs Ryvuh, gur
fba bs Gbuh, gur fba bs Mhcu, na Rcuenguvgr: 1:2 Naq ur unq gjb jvirf;
gur anzr bs gur bar jnf Unaanu, naq gur anzr bs gur bgure Cravaanu:
naq Cravaanu unq puvyqera, ohg Unaanu unq ab puvyqera.

1:3 Naq guvf zna jrag hc bhg bs uvf pvgl lrneyl gb jbefuvc naq gb
fnpevsvpr hagb gur YBEQ bs ubfgf va Fuvybu. Naq gur gjb fbaf bs Ryv,
Ubcuav naq Cuvarunf, gur cevrfgf bs gur YBEQ, jrer gurer.

1:4 Naq jura gur gvzr jnf gung Ryxnanu bssrerq, ur tnir gb Cravaanu
uvf jvsr, naq gb nyy ure fbaf naq ure qnhtugref, cbegvbaf: 1:5 Ohg
hagb Unaanu ur tnir n jbegul cbegvba; sbe ur ybirq Unaanu: ohg gur
YBEQ unq fuhg hc ure jbzo.

1:6 Naq ure nqirefnel nyfb cebibxrq ure fber, sbe gb znxr ure serg,
orpnhfr gur YBEQ unq fuhg hc ure jbzo.

1:7 Naq nf ur qvq fb lrne ol lrne, jura fur jrag hc gb gur ubhfr bs
gur YBEQ, fb fur cebibxrq ure; gurersber fur jrcg, naq qvq abg rng.

1:8 Gura fnvq Ryxnanu ure uhfonaq gb ure, Unaanu, jul jrrcrfg gubh?
naq jul rngrfg gubh abg? naq jul vf gul urneg tevrirq? nz abg V orggre
gb gurr guna gra fbaf?  1:9 Fb Unaanu ebfr hc nsgre gurl unq rngra va
Fuvybu, naq nsgre gurl unq qehax. Abj Ryv gur cevrfg fng hcba n frng
ol n cbfg bs gur grzcyr bs gur YBEQ.

1:10 Naq fur jnf va ovggrearff bs fbhy, naq cenlrq hagb gur YBEQ, naq
jrcg fber.

1:11 Naq fur ibjrq n ibj, naq fnvq, B YBEQ bs ubfgf, vs gubh jvyg
vaqrrq ybbx ba gur nssyvpgvba bs guvar unaqznvq, naq erzrzore zr, naq
abg sbetrg guvar unaqznvq, ohg jvyg tvir hagb guvar unaqznvq n zna
puvyq, gura V jvyy tvir uvz hagb gur YBEQ nyy gur qnlf bs uvf yvsr,
naq gurer funyy ab enmbe pbzr hcba uvf urnq.

1:12 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf fur pbagvahrq cenlvat orsber gur YBEQ,
gung Ryv znexrq ure zbhgu.

1:13 Abj Unaanu, fur fcnxr va ure urneg; bayl ure yvcf zbirq, ohg ure
ibvpr jnf abg urneq: gurersber Ryv gubhtug fur unq orra qehaxra.

1:14 Naq Ryv fnvq hagb ure, Ubj ybat jvyg gubh or qehaxra? chg njnl
gul jvar sebz gurr.

1:15 Naq Unaanu nafjrerq naq fnvq, Ab, zl ybeq, V nz n jbzna bs n
fbeebjshy fcvevg: V unir qehax arvgure jvar abe fgebat qevax, ohg unir
cbherq bhg zl fbhy orsber gur YBEQ.

1:16 Pbhag abg guvar unaqznvq sbe n qnhtugre bs Oryvny: sbe bhg bs gur
nohaqnapr bs zl pbzcynvag naq tevrs unir V fcbxra uvguregb.

1:17 Gura Ryv nafjrerq naq fnvq, Tb va crnpr: naq gur Tbq bs Vfenry
tenag gurr gul crgvgvba gung gubh unfg nfxrq bs uvz.

1:18 Naq fur fnvq, Yrg guvar unaqznvq svaq tenpr va gul fvtug. Fb gur
jbzna jrag ure jnl, naq qvq rng, naq ure pbhagranapr jnf ab zber fnq.

1:19 Naq gurl ebfr hc va gur zbeavat rneyl, naq jbefuvccrq orsber gur
YBEQ, naq erghearq, naq pnzr gb gurve ubhfr gb Enznu: naq Ryxnanu xarj
Unaanu uvf jvsr; naq gur YBEQ erzrzorerq ure.

1:20 Jurersber vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur gvzr jnf pbzr nobhg nsgre
Unaanu unq pbaprvirq, gung fur oner n fba, naq pnyyrq uvf anzr Fnzhry,
fnlvat, Orpnhfr V unir nfxrq uvz bs gur YBEQ.

1:21 Naq gur zna Ryxnanu, naq nyy uvf ubhfr, jrag hc gb bssre hagb gur
YBEQ gur lrneyl fnpevsvpr, naq uvf ibj.

1:22 Ohg Unaanu jrag abg hc; sbe fur fnvq hagb ure uhfonaq, V jvyy abg
tb hc hagvy gur puvyq or jrnarq, naq gura V jvyy oevat uvz, gung ur
znl nccrne orsber gur YBEQ, naq gurer novqr sbe rire.

1:23 Naq Ryxnanu ure uhfonaq fnvq hagb ure, Qb jung frrzrgu gurr tbbq;
gneel hagvy gubh unir jrnarq uvz; bayl gur YBEQ rfgnoyvfu uvf jbeq. Fb
gur jbzna nobqr, naq tnir ure fba fhpx hagvy fur jrnarq uvz.

1:24 Naq jura fur unq jrnarq uvz, fur gbbx uvz hc jvgu ure, jvgu guerr
ohyybpxf, naq bar rcunu bs sybhe, naq n obggyr bs jvar, naq oebhtug
uvz hagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ va Fuvybu: naq gur puvyq jnf lbhat.

1:25 Naq gurl fyrj n ohyybpx, naq oebhtug gur puvyq gb Ryv.

1:26 Naq fur fnvq, Bu zl ybeq, nf gul fbhy yvirgu, zl ybeq, V nz gur
jbzna gung fgbbq ol gurr urer, cenlvat hagb gur YBEQ.

1:27 Sbe guvf puvyq V cenlrq; naq gur YBEQ ungu tvira zr zl crgvgvba
juvpu V nfxrq bs uvz: 1:28 Gurersber nyfb V unir yrag uvz gb gur YBEQ;
nf ybat nf ur yvirgu ur funyy or yrag gb gur YBEQ. Naq ur jbefuvccrq
gur YBEQ gurer.

2:1 Naq Unaanu cenlrq, naq fnvq, Zl urneg erwbvprgu va gur YBEQ, zvar
ubea vf rknygrq va gur YBEQ: zl zbhgu vf raynetrq bire zvar rarzvrf;
orpnhfr V erwbvpr va gul fnyingvba.

2:2 Gurer vf abar ubyl nf gur YBEQ: sbe gurer vf abar orfvqr gurr:
arvgure vf gurer nal ebpx yvxr bhe Tbq.

2:3 Gnyx ab zber fb rkprrqvat cebhqyl; yrg abg neebtnapl pbzr bhg bs
lbhe zbhgu: sbe gur YBEQ vf n Tbq bs xabjyrqtr, naq ol uvz npgvbaf ner
jrvturq.

2:4 Gur objf bs gur zvtugl zra ner oebxra, naq gurl gung fghzoyrq ner
tveqrq jvgu fgeratgu.

2:5 Gurl gung jrer shyy unir uverq bhg gurzfryirf sbe oernq; naq gurl
gung jrer uhatel prnfrq: fb gung gur oneera ungu obea frira; naq fur
gung ungu znal puvyqera vf jnkrq srroyr.

2:6 Gur YBEQ xvyyrgu, naq znxrgu nyvir: ur oevatrgu qbja gb gur tenir,
naq oevatrgu hc.

2:7 Gur YBEQ znxrgu cbbe, naq znxrgu evpu: ur oevatrgu ybj, naq
yvsgrgu hc.

2:8 Ur envfrgu hc gur cbbe bhg bs gur qhfg, naq yvsgrgu hc gur orttne
sebz gur qhatuvyy, gb frg gurz nzbat cevaprf, naq gb znxr gurz vaurevg
gur guebar bs tybel: sbe gur cvyynef bs gur rnegu ner gur YBEQ'f, naq
ur ungu frg gur jbeyq hcba gurz.

2:9 Ur jvyy xrrc gur srrg bs uvf fnvagf, naq gur jvpxrq funyy or
fvyrag va qnexarff; sbe ol fgeratgu funyy ab zna cerinvy.

2:10 Gur nqirefnevrf bs gur YBEQ funyy or oebxra gb cvrprf; bhg bs
urnira funyy ur guhaqre hcba gurz: gur YBEQ funyy whqtr gur raqf bs
gur rnegu; naq ur funyy tvir fgeratgu hagb uvf xvat, naq rknyg gur
ubea bs uvf nabvagrq.

2:11 Naq Ryxnanu jrag gb Enznu gb uvf ubhfr. Naq gur puvyq qvq
zvavfgre hagb gur YBEQ orsber Ryv gur cevrfg.

2:12 Abj gur fbaf bs Ryv jrer fbaf bs Oryvny; gurl xarj abg gur YBEQ.

2:13 Naq gur cevrfg'f phfgbz jvgu gur crbcyr jnf, gung, jura nal zna
bssrerq fnpevsvpr, gur cevrfg'f freinag pnzr, juvyr gur syrfu jnf va
frrguvat, jvgu n syrfuubbx bs guerr grrgu va uvf unaq; 2:14 Naq ur
fgehpx vg vagb gur cna, be xrggyr, be pnyqeba, be cbg; nyy gung gur
syrfuubbx oebhtug hc gur cevrfg gbbx sbe uvzfrys. Fb gurl qvq va
Fuvybu hagb nyy gur Vfenryvgrf gung pnzr guvgure.

2:15 Nyfb orsber gurl oheag gur sng, gur cevrfg'f freinag pnzr, naq
fnvq gb gur zna gung fnpevsvprq, Tvir syrfu gb ebnfg sbe gur cevrfg;
sbe ur jvyy abg unir fbqqra syrfu bs gurr, ohg enj.

2:16 Naq vs nal zna fnvq hagb uvz, Yrg gurz abg snvy gb ohea gur sng
cerfragyl, naq gura gnxr nf zhpu nf gul fbhy qrfvergu; gura ur jbhyq
nafjre uvz, Anl; ohg gubh funyg tvir vg zr abj: naq vs abg, V jvyy
gnxr vg ol sbepr.

2:17 Jurersber gur fva bs gur lbhat zra jnf irel terng orsber gur
YBEQ: sbe zra noubeerq gur bssrevat bs gur YBEQ.

2:18 Ohg Fnzhry zvavfgrerq orsber gur YBEQ, orvat n puvyq, tveqrq jvgu
n yvara rcubq.

2:19 Zberbire uvf zbgure znqr uvz n yvggyr pbng, naq oebhtug vg gb uvz
sebz lrne gb lrne, jura fur pnzr hc jvgu ure uhfonaq gb bssre gur
lrneyl fnpevsvpr.

2:20 Naq Ryv oyrffrq Ryxnanu naq uvf jvsr, naq fnvq, Gur YBEQ tvir
gurr frrq bs guvf jbzna sbe gur ybna juvpu vf yrag gb gur YBEQ. Naq
gurl jrag hagb gurve bja ubzr.

2:21 Naq gur YBEQ ivfvgrq Unaanu, fb gung fur pbaprvirq, naq oner
guerr fbaf naq gjb qnhtugref. Naq gur puvyq Fnzhry terj orsber gur
YBEQ.

2:22 Abj Ryv jnf irel byq, naq urneq nyy gung uvf fbaf qvq hagb nyy
Vfenry; naq ubj gurl ynl jvgu gur jbzra gung nffrzoyrq ng gur qbbe bs
gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba.

2:23 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Jul qb lr fhpu guvatf? sbe V urne bs lbhe
rivy qrnyvatf ol nyy guvf crbcyr.

2:24 Anl, zl fbaf; sbe vg vf ab tbbq ercbeg gung V urne: lr znxr gur
YBEQ'f crbcyr gb genafterff.

2:25 Vs bar zna fva ntnvafg nabgure, gur whqtr funyy whqtr uvz: ohg vs
n zna fva ntnvafg gur YBEQ, jub funyy vagerng sbe uvz? Abgjvgufgnaqvat
gurl urnexrarq abg hagb gur ibvpr bs gurve sngure, orpnhfr gur YBEQ
jbhyq fynl gurz.

2:26 Naq gur puvyq Fnzhry terj ba, naq jnf va snibhe obgu jvgu gur
YBEQ, naq nyfb jvgu zra.

2:27 Naq gurer pnzr n zna bs Tbq hagb Ryv, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Guhf
fnvgu gur YBEQ, Qvq V cynvayl nccrne hagb gur ubhfr bs gul sngure,
jura gurl jrer va Rtlcg va Cunenbu'f ubhfr?  2:28 Naq qvq V pubbfr uvz
bhg bs nyy gur gevorf bs Vfenry gb or zl cevrfg, gb bssre hcba zvar
nygne, gb ohea vaprafr, gb jrne na rcubq orsber zr? naq qvq V tvir
hagb gur ubhfr bs gul sngure nyy gur bssrevatf znqr ol sver bs gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry?  2:29 Jurersber xvpx lr ng zl fnpevsvpr naq ng
zvar bssrevat, juvpu V unir pbzznaqrq va zl unovgngvba; naq ubabherfg
gul fbaf nobir zr, gb znxr lbhefryirf sng jvgu gur puvrsrfg bs nyy gur
bssrevatf bs Vfenry zl crbcyr?  2:30 Jurersber gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry
fnvgu, V fnvq vaqrrq gung gul ubhfr, naq gur ubhfr bs gul sngure,
fubhyq jnyx orsber zr sbe rire: ohg abj gur YBEQ fnvgu, Or vg sne sebz
zr; sbe gurz gung ubabhe zr V jvyy ubabhe, naq gurl gung qrfcvfr zr
funyy or yvtugyl rfgrrzrq.

2:31 Orubyq, gur qnlf pbzr, gung V jvyy phg bss guvar nez, naq gur nez
bs gul sngure'f ubhfr, gung gurer funyy abg or na byq zna va guvar
ubhfr.

2:32 Naq gubh funyg frr na rarzl va zl unovgngvba, va nyy gur jrnygu
juvpu Tbq funyy tvir Vfenry: naq gurer funyy abg or na byq zna va
guvar ubhfr sbe rire.

2:33 Naq gur zna bs guvar, jubz V funyy abg phg bss sebz zvar nygne,
funyy or gb pbafhzr guvar rlrf, naq gb tevrir guvar urneg: naq nyy gur
vapernfr bs guvar ubhfr funyy qvr va gur sybjre bs gurve ntr.

2:34 Naq guvf funyy or n fvta hagb gurr, gung funyy pbzr hcba gul gjb
fbaf, ba Ubcuav naq Cuvarunf; va bar qnl gurl funyy qvr obgu bs gurz.

2:35 Naq V jvyy envfr zr hc n snvgushy cevrfg, gung funyy qb nppbeqvat
gb gung juvpu vf va zvar urneg naq va zl zvaq: naq V jvyy ohvyq uvz n
fher ubhfr; naq ur funyy jnyx orsber zvar nabvagrq sbe rire.

2:36 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, gung rirel bar gung vf yrsg va guvar
ubhfr funyy pbzr naq pebhpu gb uvz sbe n cvrpr bs fvyire naq n zbefry
bs oernq, naq funyy fnl, Chg zr, V cenl gurr, vagb bar bs gur cevrfgf'
bssvprf, gung V znl rng n cvrpr bs oernq.

3:1 Naq gur puvyq Fnzhry zvavfgrerq hagb gur YBEQ orsber Ryv. Naq gur
jbeq bs gur YBEQ jnf cerpvbhf va gubfr qnlf; gurer jnf ab bcra ivfvba.

3:2 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng gung gvzr, jura Ryv jnf ynvq qbja va uvf
cynpr, naq uvf rlrf ortna gb jnk qvz, gung ur pbhyq abg frr; 3:3 Naq
rer gur ynzc bs Tbq jrag bhg va gur grzcyr bs gur YBEQ, jurer gur nex
bs Tbq jnf, naq Fnzhry jnf ynvq qbja gb fyrrc; 3:4 Gung gur YBEQ
pnyyrq Fnzhry: naq ur nafjrerq, Urer nz V.

3:5 Naq ur ena hagb Ryv, naq fnvq, Urer nz V; sbe gubh pnyyrqfg zr.
Naq ur fnvq, V pnyyrq abg; yvr qbja ntnva. Naq ur jrag naq ynl qbja.

3:6 Naq gur YBEQ pnyyrq lrg ntnva, Fnzhry. Naq Fnzhry nebfr naq jrag
gb Ryv, naq fnvq, Urer nz V; sbe gubh qvqfg pnyy zr. Naq ur nafjrerq,
V pnyyrq abg, zl fba; yvr qbja ntnva.

3:7 Abj Fnzhry qvq abg lrg xabj gur YBEQ, arvgure jnf gur jbeq bs gur
YBEQ lrg erirnyrq hagb uvz.

3:8 Naq gur YBEQ pnyyrq Fnzhry ntnva gur guveq gvzr. Naq ur nebfr naq
jrag gb Ryv, naq fnvq, Urer nz V; sbe gubh qvqfg pnyy zr. Naq Ryv
creprvirq gung gur YBEQ unq pnyyrq gur puvyq.

3:9 Gurersber Ryv fnvq hagb Fnzhry, Tb, yvr qbja: naq vg funyy or, vs
ur pnyy gurr, gung gubh funyg fnl, Fcrnx, YBEQ; sbe gul freinag
urnergu. Fb Fnzhry jrag naq ynl qbja va uvf cynpr.

3:10 Naq gur YBEQ pnzr, naq fgbbq, naq pnyyrq nf ng bgure gvzrf,
Fnzhry, Fnzhry. Gura Fnzhry nafjrerq, Fcrnx; sbe gul freinag urnergu.

3:11 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq gb Fnzhry, Orubyq, V jvyy qb n guvat va Vfenry,
ng juvpu obgu gur rnef bs rirel bar gung urnergu vg funyy gvatyr.

3:12 Va gung qnl V jvyy cresbez ntnvafg Ryv nyy guvatf juvpu V unir
fcbxra pbapreavat uvf ubhfr: jura V ortva, V jvyy nyfb znxr na raq.

3:13 Sbe V unir gbyq uvz gung V jvyy whqtr uvf ubhfr sbe rire sbe gur
vavdhvgl juvpu ur xabjrgu; orpnhfr uvf fbaf znqr gurzfryirf ivyr, naq
ur erfgenvarq gurz abg.

3:14 Naq gurersber V unir fjbea hagb gur ubhfr bs Ryv, gung gur
vavdhvgl bs Ryv'f ubhfr funyy abg or chetrq jvgu fnpevsvpr abe
bssrevat sbe rire.

3:15 Naq Fnzhry ynl hagvy gur zbeavat, naq bcrarq gur qbbef bs gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ. Naq Fnzhry srnerq gb furj Ryv gur ivfvba.

3:16 Gura Ryv pnyyrq Fnzhry, naq fnvq, Fnzhry, zl fba. Naq ur
nafjrerq, Urer nz V.

3:17 Naq ur fnvq, Jung vf gur guvat gung gur YBEQ ungu fnvq hagb gurr?
V cenl gurr uvqr vg abg sebz zr: Tbq qb fb gb gurr, naq zber nyfb, vs
gubh uvqr nal guvat sebz zr bs nyy gur guvatf gung ur fnvq hagb gurr.

3:18 Naq Fnzhry gbyq uvz rirel juvg, naq uvq abguvat sebz uvz. Naq ur
fnvq, Vg vf gur YBEQ: yrg uvz qb jung frrzrgu uvz tbbq.

3:19 Naq Fnzhry terj, naq gur YBEQ jnf jvgu uvz, naq qvq yrg abar bs
uvf jbeqf snyy gb gur tebhaq.

3:20 Naq nyy Vfenry sebz Qna rira gb Orrefuron xarj gung Fnzhry jnf
rfgnoyvfurq gb or n cebcurg bs gur YBEQ.

3:21 Naq gur YBEQ nccrnerq ntnva va Fuvybu: sbe gur YBEQ erirnyrq
uvzfrys gb Fnzhry va Fuvybu ol gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ.

4:1 Naq gur jbeq bs Fnzhry pnzr gb nyy Vfenry. Abj Vfenry jrag bhg
ntnvafg gur Cuvyvfgvarf gb onggyr, naq cvgpurq orfvqr Rorarmre: naq
gur Cuvyvfgvarf cvgpurq va Ncurx.

4:2 Naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf chg gurzfryirf va neenl ntnvafg Vfenry: naq
jura gurl wbvarq onggyr, Vfenry jnf fzvggra orsber gur Cuvyvfgvarf:
naq gurl fyrj bs gur nezl va gur svryq nobhg sbhe gubhfnaq zra.

4:3 Naq jura gur crbcyr jrer pbzr vagb gur pnzc, gur ryqref bs Vfenry
fnvq, Jurersber ungu gur YBEQ fzvggra hf gb qnl orsber gur
Cuvyvfgvarf? Yrg hf srgpu gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ bhg bs
Fuvybu hagb hf, gung, jura vg pbzrgu nzbat hf, vg znl fnir hf bhg bs
gur unaq bs bhe rarzvrf.

4:4 Fb gur crbcyr frag gb Fuvybu, gung gurl zvtug oevat sebz gurapr
gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ bs ubfgf, juvpu qjryyrgu orgjrra
gur purehovzf: naq gur gjb fbaf bs Ryv, Ubcuav naq Cuvarunf, jrer
gurer jvgu gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs Tbq.

4:5 Naq jura gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ pnzr vagb gur pnzc,
nyy Vfenry fubhgrq jvgu n terng fubhg, fb gung gur rnegu enat ntnva.

4:6 Naq jura gur Cuvyvfgvarf urneq gur abvfr bs gur fubhg, gurl fnvq,
Jung zrnargu gur abvfr bs guvf terng fubhg va gur pnzc bs gur Uroerjf?
Naq gurl haqrefgbbq gung gur nex bs gur YBEQ jnf pbzr vagb gur pnzc.

4:7 Naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf jrer nsenvq, sbe gurl fnvq, Tbq vf pbzr vagb
gur pnzc. Naq gurl fnvq, Jbr hagb hf! sbe gurer ungu abg orra fhpu n
guvat urergbsber.

4:8 Jbr hagb hf! jub funyy qryvire hf bhg bs gur unaq bs gurfr zvtugl
Tbqf? gurfr ner gur Tbqf gung fzbgr gur Rtlcgvnaf jvgu nyy gur cynthrf
va gur jvyqrearff.

4:9 Or fgebat naq dhvg lbhefryirf yvxr zra, B lr Cuvyvfgvarf, gung lr
or abg freinagf hagb gur Uroerjf, nf gurl unir orra gb lbh: dhvg
lbhefryirf yvxr zra, naq svtug.

4:10 Naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf sbhtug, naq Vfenry jnf fzvggra, naq gurl syrq
rirel zna vagb uvf grag: naq gurer jnf n irel terng fynhtugre; sbe
gurer sryy bs Vfenry guvegl gubhfnaq sbbgzra.

4:11 Naq gur nex bs Tbq jnf gnxra; naq gur gjb fbaf bs Ryv, Ubcuav naq
Cuvarunf, jrer fynva.

4:12 Naq gurer ena n zna bs Orawnzva bhg bs gur nezl, naq pnzr gb
Fuvybu gur fnzr qnl jvgu uvf pybgurf erag, naq jvgu rnegu hcba uvf
urnq.

4:13 Naq jura ur pnzr, yb, Ryv fng hcba n frng ol gur jnlfvqr
jngpuvat: sbe uvf urneg gerzoyrq sbe gur nex bs Tbq. Naq jura gur zna
pnzr vagb gur pvgl, naq gbyq vg, nyy gur pvgl pevrq bhg.

4:14 Naq jura Ryv urneq gur abvfr bs gur pelvat, ur fnvq, Jung zrnargu
gur abvfr bs guvf ghzhyg? Naq gur zna pnzr va unfgvyl, naq gbyq Ryv.

4:15 Abj Ryv jnf avargl naq rvtug lrnef byq; naq uvf rlrf jrer qvz,
gung ur pbhyq abg frr.

4:16 Naq gur zna fnvq hagb Ryv, V nz ur gung pnzr bhg bs gur nezl, naq
V syrq gb qnl bhg bs gur nezl. Naq ur fnvq, Jung vf gurer qbar, zl
fba?  4:17 Naq gur zrffratre nafjrerq naq fnvq, Vfenry vf syrq orsber
gur Cuvyvfgvarf, naq gurer ungu orra nyfb n terng fynhtugre nzbat gur
crbcyr, naq gul gjb fbaf nyfb, Ubcuav naq Cuvarunf, ner qrnq, naq gur
nex bs Tbq vf gnxra.

4:18 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura ur znqr zragvba bs gur nex bs Tbq, gung
ur sryy sebz bss gur frng onpxjneq ol gur fvqr bs gur tngr, naq uvf
arpx oenxr, naq ur qvrq: sbe ur jnf na byq zna, naq urnil. Naq ur unq
whqtrq Vfenry sbegl lrnef.

4:19 Naq uvf qnhtugre va ynj, Cuvarunf' jvsr, jnf jvgu puvyq, arne gb
or qryvirerq: naq jura fur urneq gur gvqvatf gung gur nex bs Tbq jnf
gnxra, naq gung ure sngure va ynj naq ure uhfonaq jrer qrnq, fur objrq
urefrys naq geninvyrq; sbe ure cnvaf pnzr hcba ure.

4:20 Naq nobhg gur gvzr bs ure qrngu gur jbzra gung fgbbq ol ure fnvq
hagb ure, Srne abg; sbe gubh unfg obea n fba. Ohg fur nafjrerq abg,
arvgure qvq fur ertneq vg.

4:21 Naq fur anzrq gur puvyq Vpunobq, fnlvat, Gur tybel vf qrcnegrq
sebz Vfenry: orpnhfr gur nex bs Tbq jnf gnxra, naq orpnhfr bs ure
sngure va ynj naq ure uhfonaq.

4:22 Naq fur fnvq, Gur tybel vf qrcnegrq sebz Vfenry: sbe gur nex bs
Tbq vf gnxra.

5:1 Naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf gbbx gur nex bs Tbq, naq oebhtug vg sebz
Rorarmre hagb Nfuqbq.

5:2 Jura gur Cuvyvfgvarf gbbx gur nex bs Tbq, gurl oebhtug vg vagb gur
ubhfr bs Qntba, naq frg vg ol Qntba.

5:3 Naq jura gurl bs Nfuqbq nebfr rneyl ba gur zbeebj, orubyq, Qntba
jnf snyyra hcba uvf snpr gb gur rnegu orsber gur nex bs gur YBEQ. Naq
gurl gbbx Qntba, naq frg uvz va uvf cynpr ntnva.

5:4 Naq jura gurl nebfr rneyl ba gur zbeebj zbeavat, orubyq, Qntba jnf
snyyra hcba uvf snpr gb gur tebhaq orsber gur nex bs gur YBEQ; naq gur
urnq bs Qntba naq obgu gur cnyzf bs uvf unaqf jrer phg bss hcba gur
guerfubyq; bayl gur fghzc bs Qntba jnf yrsg gb uvz.

5:5 Gurersber arvgure gur cevrfgf bs Qntba, abe nal gung pbzr vagb
Qntba'f ubhfr, gernq ba gur guerfubyq bs Qntba va Nfuqbq hagb guvf
qnl.

5:6 Ohg gur unaq bs gur YBEQ jnf urnil hcba gurz bs Nfuqbq, naq ur
qrfgeblrq gurz, naq fzbgr gurz jvgu rzrebqf, rira Nfuqbq naq gur
pbnfgf gurerbs.

5:7 Naq jura gur zra bs Nfuqbq fnj gung vg jnf fb, gurl fnvq, Gur nex
bs gur Tbq bs Vfenry funyy abg novqr jvgu hf: sbe uvf unaq vf fber
hcba hf, naq hcba Qntba bhe tbq.

5:8 Gurl frag gurersber naq tngurerq nyy gur ybeqf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf
hagb gurz, naq fnvq, Jung funyy jr qb jvgu gur nex bs gur Tbq bs
Vfenry? Naq gurl nafjrerq, Yrg gur nex bs gur Tbq bs Vfenry or pneevrq
nobhg hagb Tngu. Naq gurl pneevrq gur nex bs gur Tbq bs Vfenry nobhg
guvgure.

5:9 Naq vg jnf fb, gung, nsgre gurl unq pneevrq vg nobhg, gur unaq bs
gur YBEQ jnf ntnvafg gur pvgl jvgu n irel terng qrfgehpgvba: naq ur
fzbgr gur zra bs gur pvgl, obgu fznyy naq terng, naq gurl unq rzrebqf
va gurve frperg cnegf.

5:10 Gurersber gurl frag gur nex bs Tbq gb Rxeba. Naq vg pnzr gb cnff,
nf gur nex bs Tbq pnzr gb Rxeba, gung gur Rxebavgrf pevrq bhg, fnlvat,
Gurl unir oebhtug nobhg gur nex bs gur Tbq bs Vfenry gb hf, gb fynl hf
naq bhe crbcyr.

5:11 Fb gurl frag naq tngurerq gbtrgure nyy gur ybeqf bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf, naq fnvq, Fraq njnl gur nex bs gur Tbq bs Vfenry, naq yrg
vg tb ntnva gb uvf bja cynpr, gung vg fynl hf abg, naq bhe crbcyr: sbe
gurer jnf n qrnqyl qrfgehpgvba guebhtubhg nyy gur pvgl; gur unaq bs
Tbq jnf irel urnil gurer.

5:12 Naq gur zra gung qvrq abg jrer fzvggra jvgu gur rzrebqf: naq gur
pel bs gur pvgl jrag hc gb urnira.

6:1 Naq gur nex bs gur YBEQ jnf va gur pbhagel bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf
frira zbaguf.

6:2 Naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf pnyyrq sbe gur cevrfgf naq gur qvivaref,
fnlvat, Jung funyy jr qb gb gur nex bs gur YBEQ? gryy hf jurerjvgu jr
funyy fraq vg gb uvf cynpr.

6:3 Naq gurl fnvq, Vs lr fraq njnl gur nex bs gur Tbq bs Vfenry, fraq
vg abg rzcgl; ohg va nal jvfr erghea uvz n gerfcnff bssrevat: gura lr
funyy or urnyrq, naq vg funyy or xabja gb lbh jul uvf unaq vf abg
erzbirq sebz lbh.

6:4 Gura fnvq gurl, Jung funyy or gur gerfcnff bssrevat juvpu jr funyy
erghea gb uvz? Gurl nafjrerq, Svir tbyqra rzrebqf, naq svir tbyqra
zvpr, nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs gur ybeqf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf: sbe bar
cynthr jnf ba lbh nyy, naq ba lbhe ybeqf.

6:5 Jurersber lr funyy znxr vzntrf bs lbhe rzrebqf, naq vzntrf bs lbhe
zvpr gung zne gur ynaq; naq lr funyy tvir tybel hagb gur Tbq bs
Vfenry: crenqiragher ur jvyy yvtugra uvf unaq sebz bss lbh, naq sebz
bss lbhe tbqf, naq sebz bss lbhe ynaq.

6:6 Jurersber gura qb lr uneqra lbhe urnegf, nf gur Rtlcgvnaf naq
Cunenbu uneqrarq gurve urnegf? jura ur unq jebhtug jbaqreshyyl nzbat
gurz, qvq gurl abg yrg gur crbcyr tb, naq gurl qrcnegrq?  6:7 Abj
gurersber znxr n arj pneg, naq gnxr gjb zvypu xvar, ba juvpu gurer
ungu pbzr ab lbxr, naq gvr gur xvar gb gur pneg, naq oevat gurve
pnyirf ubzr sebz gurz: 6:8 Naq gnxr gur nex bs gur YBEQ, naq ynl vg
hcba gur pneg; naq chg gur wrjryf bs tbyq, juvpu lr erghea uvz sbe n
gerfcnff bssrevat, va n pbssre ol gur fvqr gurerbs; naq fraq vg njnl,
gung vg znl tb.

6:9 Naq frr, vs vg tbrgu hc ol gur jnl bs uvf bja pbnfg gb
Orgufurzrfu, gura ur ungu qbar hf guvf terng rivy: ohg vs abg, gura jr
funyy xabj gung vg vf abg uvf unaq gung fzbgr hf: vg jnf n punapr gung
unccrarq gb hf.

6:10 Naq gur zra qvq fb; naq gbbx gjb zvypu xvar, naq gvrq gurz gb gur
pneg, naq fuhg hc gurve pnyirf ng ubzr: 6:11 Naq gurl ynvq gur nex bs
gur YBEQ hcba gur pneg, naq gur pbssre jvgu gur zvpr bs tbyq naq gur
vzntrf bs gurve rzrebqf.

6:12 Naq gur xvar gbbx gur fgenvtug jnl gb gur jnl bs Orgufurzrfu, naq
jrag nybat gur uvtujnl, ybjvat nf gurl jrag, naq ghearq abg nfvqr gb
gur evtug unaq be gb gur yrsg; naq gur ybeqf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf jrag
nsgre gurz hagb gur obeqre bs Orgufurzrfu.

6:13 Naq gurl bs Orgufurzrfu jrer erncvat gurve jurng uneirfg va gur
inyyrl: naq gurl yvsgrq hc gurve rlrf, naq fnj gur nex, naq erwbvprq
gb frr vg.

6:14 Naq gur pneg pnzr vagb gur svryq bs Wbfuhn, n Orgufurzvgr, naq
fgbbq gurer, jurer gurer jnf n terng fgbar: naq gurl pynir gur jbbq bs
gur pneg, naq bssrerq gur xvar n oheag bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ.

6:15 Naq gur Yrivgrf gbbx qbja gur nex bs gur YBEQ, naq gur pbssre
gung jnf jvgu vg, jurerva gur wrjryf bs tbyq jrer, naq chg gurz ba gur
terng fgbar: naq gur zra bs Orgufurzrfu bssrerq oheag bssrevatf naq
fnpevsvprq fnpevsvprf gur fnzr qnl hagb gur YBEQ.

6:16 Naq jura gur svir ybeqf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf unq frra vg, gurl
erghearq gb Rxeba gur fnzr qnl.

6:17 Naq gurfr ner gur tbyqra rzrebqf juvpu gur Cuvyvfgvarf erghearq
sbe n gerfcnff bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ; sbe Nfuqbq bar, sbe Tnmn bar,
sbe Nfxryba bar, sbe Tngu bar, sbe Rxeba bar; 6:18 Naq gur tbyqra
zvpr, nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs nyy gur pvgvrf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf
orybatvat gb gur svir ybeqf, obgu bs sraprq pvgvrf, naq bs pbhagel
ivyyntrf, rira hagb gur terng fgbar bs Nory, jurerba gurl frg qbja gur
nex bs gur YBEQ: juvpu fgbar erznvargu hagb guvf qnl va gur svryq bs
Wbfuhn, gur Orgufurzvgr.

6:19 Naq ur fzbgr gur zra bs Orgufurzrfu, orpnhfr gurl unq ybbxrq vagb
gur nex bs gur YBEQ, rira ur fzbgr bs gur crbcyr svsgl gubhfnaq naq
guerrfpber naq gra zra: naq gur crbcyr ynzragrq, orpnhfr gur YBEQ unq
fzvggra znal bs gur crbcyr jvgu n terng fynhtugre.

6:20 Naq gur zra bs Orgufurzrfu fnvq, Jub vf noyr gb fgnaq orsber guvf
ubyl YBEQ Tbq? naq gb jubz funyy ur tb hc sebz hf?  6:21 Naq gurl frag
zrffratref gb gur vaunovgnagf bs Xvewnguwrnevz, fnlvat, Gur
Cuvyvfgvarf unir oebhtug ntnva gur nex bs gur YBEQ; pbzr lr qbja, naq
srgpu vg hc gb lbh.

7:1 Naq gur zra bs Xvewnguwrnevz pnzr, naq srgpurq hc gur nex bs gur
YBEQ, naq oebhtug vg vagb gur ubhfr bs Novanqno va gur uvyy, naq
fnapgvsvrq Ryrnmne uvf fba gb xrrc gur nex bs gur YBEQ.

7:2 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, juvyr gur nex nobqr va Xvewnguwrnevz, gung
gur gvzr jnf ybat; sbe vg jnf gjragl lrnef: naq nyy gur ubhfr bs
Vfenry ynzragrq nsgre gur YBEQ.

7:3 Naq Fnzhry fcnxr hagb nyy gur ubhfr bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Vs lr qb
erghea hagb gur YBEQ jvgu nyy lbhe urnegf, gura chg njnl gur fgenatr
tbqf naq Nfugnebgu sebz nzbat lbh, naq cercner lbhe urnegf hagb gur
YBEQ, naq freir uvz bayl: naq ur jvyy qryvire lbh bhg bs gur unaq bs
gur Cuvyvfgvarf.

7:4 Gura gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq chg njnl Onnyvz naq Nfugnebgu, naq
freirq gur YBEQ bayl.

7:5 Naq Fnzhry fnvq, Tngure nyy Vfenry gb Zvmcru, naq V jvyy cenl sbe
lbh hagb gur YBEQ.

7:6 Naq gurl tngurerq gbtrgure gb Zvmcru, naq qerj jngre, naq cbherq
vg bhg orsber gur YBEQ, naq snfgrq ba gung qnl, naq fnvq gurer, Jr
unir fvaarq ntnvafg gur YBEQ. Naq Fnzhry whqtrq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry
va Zvmcru.

7:7 Naq jura gur Cuvyvfgvarf urneq gung gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jrer
tngurerq gbtrgure gb Zvmcru, gur ybeqf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf jrag hc
ntnvafg Vfenry. Naq jura gur puvyqera bs Vfenry urneq vg, gurl jrer
nsenvq bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf.

7:8 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry fnvq gb Fnzhry, Prnfr abg gb pel hagb
gur YBEQ bhe Tbq sbe hf, gung ur jvyy fnir hf bhg bs gur unaq bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf.

7:9 Naq Fnzhry gbbx n fhpxvat ynzo, naq bssrerq vg sbe n oheag
bssrevat jubyyl hagb gur YBEQ: naq Fnzhry pevrq hagb gur YBEQ sbe
Vfenry; naq gur YBEQ urneq uvz.

7:10 Naq nf Fnzhry jnf bssrevat hc gur oheag bssrevat, gur Cuvyvfgvarf
qerj arne gb onggyr ntnvafg Vfenry: ohg gur YBEQ guhaqrerq jvgu n
terng guhaqre ba gung qnl hcba gur Cuvyvfgvarf, naq qvfpbzsvgrq gurz;
naq gurl jrer fzvggra orsber Vfenry.

7:11 Naq gur zra bs Vfenry jrag bhg bs Zvmcru, naq chefhrq gur
Cuvyvfgvarf, naq fzbgr gurz, hagvy gurl pnzr haqre Orgupne.

7:12 Gura Fnzhry gbbx n fgbar, naq frg vg orgjrra Zvmcru naq Fura, naq
pnyyrq gur anzr bs vg Rorarmre, fnlvat, Uvguregb ungu gur YBEQ urycrq
hf.

7:13 Fb gur Cuvyvfgvarf jrer fhoqhrq, naq gurl pnzr ab zber vagb gur
pbnfg bs Vfenry: naq gur unaq bs gur YBEQ jnf ntnvafg gur Cuvyvfgvarf
nyy gur qnlf bs Fnzhry.

7:14 Naq gur pvgvrf juvpu gur Cuvyvfgvarf unq gnxra sebz Vfenry jrer
erfgberq gb Vfenry, sebz Rxeba rira hagb Tngu; naq gur pbnfgf gurerbs
qvq Vfenry qryvire bhg bs gur unaqf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf. Naq gurer jnf
crnpr orgjrra Vfenry naq gur Nzbevgrf.

7:15 Naq Fnzhry whqtrq Vfenry nyy gur qnlf bs uvf yvsr.

7:16 Naq ur jrag sebz lrne gb lrne va pvephvg gb Orgury, naq Tvytny,
naq Zvmcru, naq whqtrq Vfenry va nyy gubfr cynprf.

7:17 Naq uvf erghea jnf gb Enznu; sbe gurer jnf uvf ubhfr; naq gurer
ur whqtrq Vfenry; naq gurer ur ohvyg na nygne hagb gur YBEQ.

8:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Fnzhry jnf byq, gung ur znqr uvf fbaf
whqtrf bire Vfenry.

8:2 Abj gur anzr bs uvf svefgobea jnf Wbry; naq gur anzr bs uvf
frpbaq, Novnu: gurl jrer whqtrf va Orrefuron.

8:3 Naq uvf fbaf jnyxrq abg va uvf jnlf, ohg ghearq nfvqr nsgre yhper,
naq gbbx oevorf, naq creiregrq whqtzrag.

8:4 Gura nyy gur ryqref bs Vfenry tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure, naq
pnzr gb Fnzhry hagb Enznu, 8:5 Naq fnvq hagb uvz, Orubyq, gubh neg
byq, naq gul fbaf jnyx abg va gul jnlf: abj znxr hf n xvat gb whqtr hf
yvxr nyy gur angvbaf.

8:6 Ohg gur guvat qvfcyrnfrq Fnzhry, jura gurl fnvq, Tvir hf n xvat gb
whqtr hf. Naq Fnzhry cenlrq hagb gur YBEQ.

8:7 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Fnzhry, Urnexra hagb gur ibvpr bs gur
crbcyr va nyy gung gurl fnl hagb gurr: sbe gurl unir abg erwrpgrq
gurr, ohg gurl unir erwrpgrq zr, gung V fubhyq abg ervta bire gurz.

8:8 Nppbeqvat gb nyy gur jbexf juvpu gurl unir qbar fvapr gur qnl gung
V oebhtug gurz hc bhg bs Rtlcg rira hagb guvf qnl, jurerjvgu gurl unir
sbefnxra zr, naq freirq bgure tbqf, fb qb gurl nyfb hagb gurr.

8:9 Abj gurersber urnexra hagb gurve ibvpr: ubjorvg lrg cebgrfg
fbyrzayl hagb gurz, naq furj gurz gur znaare bs gur xvat gung funyy
ervta bire gurz.

8:10 Naq Fnzhry gbyq nyy gur jbeqf bs gur YBEQ hagb gur crbcyr gung
nfxrq bs uvz n xvat.

8:11 Naq ur fnvq, Guvf jvyy or gur znaare bs gur xvat gung funyy ervta
bire lbh: Ur jvyy gnxr lbhe fbaf, naq nccbvag gurz sbe uvzfrys, sbe
uvf punevbgf, naq gb or uvf ubefrzra; naq fbzr funyy eha orsber uvf
punevbgf.

8:12 Naq ur jvyy nccbvag uvz pncgnvaf bire gubhfnaqf, naq pncgnvaf
bire svsgvrf; naq jvyy frg gurz gb rne uvf tebhaq, naq gb ernc uvf
uneirfg, naq gb znxr uvf vafgehzragf bs jne, naq vafgehzragf bs uvf
punevbgf.

8:13 Naq ur jvyy gnxr lbhe qnhtugref gb or pbasrpgvbanevrf, naq gb or
pbbxf, naq gb or onxref.

8:14 Naq ur jvyy gnxr lbhe svryqf, naq lbhe ivarlneqf, naq lbhe
byvirlneqf, rira gur orfg bs gurz, naq tvir gurz gb uvf freinagf.

8:15 Naq ur jvyy gnxr gur gragu bs lbhe frrq, naq bs lbhe ivarlneqf,
naq tvir gb uvf bssvpref, naq gb uvf freinagf.

8:16 Naq ur jvyy gnxr lbhe zrafreinagf, naq lbhe znvqfreinagf, naq
lbhe tbbqyvrfg lbhat zra, naq lbhe nffrf, naq chg gurz gb uvf jbex.

8:17 Ur jvyy gnxr gur gragu bs lbhe furrc: naq lr funyy or uvf
freinagf.

8:18 Naq lr funyy pel bhg va gung qnl orpnhfr bs lbhe xvat juvpu lr
funyy unir pubfra lbh; naq gur YBEQ jvyy abg urne lbh va gung qnl.

8:19 Arireguryrff gur crbcyr ershfrq gb borl gur ibvpr bs Fnzhry; naq
gurl fnvq, Anl; ohg jr jvyy unir n xvat bire hf; 8:20 Gung jr nyfb znl
or yvxr nyy gur angvbaf; naq gung bhe xvat znl whqtr hf, naq tb bhg
orsber hf, naq svtug bhe onggyrf.

8:21 Naq Fnzhry urneq nyy gur jbeqf bs gur crbcyr, naq ur erurnefrq
gurz va gur rnef bs gur YBEQ.

8:22 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq gb Fnzhry, Urnexra hagb gurve ibvpr, naq znxr
gurz n xvat. Naq Fnzhry fnvq hagb gur zra bs Vfenry, Tb lr rirel zna
hagb uvf pvgl.

9:1 Abj gurer jnf n zna bs Orawnzva, jubfr anzr jnf Xvfu, gur fba bs
Novry, gur fba bs Mrebe, gur fba bs Orpubengu, gur fba bs Ncuvnu, n
Orawnzvgr, n zvtugl zna bs cbjre.

9:2 Naq ur unq n fba, jubfr anzr jnf Fnhy, n pubvpr lbhat zna, naq n
tbbqyl: naq gurer jnf abg nzbat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry n tbbqyvre
crefba guna ur: sebz uvf fubhyqref naq hcjneq ur jnf uvture guna nal
bs gur crbcyr.

9:3 Naq gur nffrf bs Xvfu Fnhy'f sngure jrer ybfg. Naq Xvfu fnvq gb
Fnhy uvf fba, Gnxr abj bar bs gur freinagf jvgu gurr, naq nevfr, tb
frrx gur nffrf.

9:4 Naq ur cnffrq guebhtu zbhag Rcuenvz, naq cnffrq guebhtu gur ynaq
bs Funyvfun, ohg gurl sbhaq gurz abg: gura gurl cnffrq guebhtu gur
ynaq bs Funyvz, naq gurer gurl jrer abg: naq ur cnffrq guebhtu gur
ynaq bs gur Orawnzvgrf, ohg gurl sbhaq gurz abg.

9:5 Naq jura gurl jrer pbzr gb gur ynaq bs Mhcu, Fnhy fnvq gb uvf
freinag gung jnf jvgu uvz, Pbzr, naq yrg hf erghea; yrfg zl sngure
yrnir pnevat sbe gur nffrf, naq gnxr gubhtug sbe hf.

9:6 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Orubyq abj, gurer vf va guvf pvgl n zna bs
Tbq, naq ur vf na ubabhenoyr zna; nyy gung ur fnvgu pbzrgu fheryl gb
cnff: abj yrg hf tb guvgure; crenqiragher ur pna furj hf bhe jnl gung
jr fubhyq tb.

9:7 Gura fnvq Fnhy gb uvf freinag, Ohg, orubyq, vs jr tb, jung funyy
jr oevat gur zna? sbe gur oernq vf fcrag va bhe irffryf, naq gurer vf
abg n cerfrag gb oevat gb gur zna bs Tbq: jung unir jr?  9:8 Naq gur
freinag nafjrerq Fnhy ntnva, naq fnvq, Orubyq, V unir urer ng unaq gur
sbhegu cneg bs n furxry bs fvyire: gung jvyy V tvir gb gur zna bs Tbq,
gb gryy hf bhe jnl.

9:9 (Orsbergvzr va Vfenry, jura n zna jrag gb radhver bs Tbq, guhf ur
fcnxr, Pbzr, naq yrg hf tb gb gur frre: sbe ur gung vf abj pnyyrq n
Cebcurg jnf orsbergvzr pnyyrq n Frre.)  9:10 Gura fnvq Fnhy gb uvf
freinag, Jryy fnvq; pbzr, yrg hf tb. Fb gurl jrag hagb gur pvgl jurer
gur zna bs Tbq jnf.

9:11 Naq nf gurl jrag hc gur uvyy gb gur pvgl, gurl sbhaq lbhat
znvqraf tbvat bhg gb qenj jngre, naq fnvq hagb gurz, Vf gur frre urer?
9:12 Naq gurl nafjrerq gurz, naq fnvq, Ur vf; orubyq, ur vf orsber
lbh: znxr unfgr abj, sbe ur pnzr gb qnl gb gur pvgl; sbe gurer vf n
fnpevsvpr bs gur crbcyr gb qnl va gur uvtu cynpr: 9:13 Nf fbba nf lr
or pbzr vagb gur pvgl, lr funyy fgenvtugjnl svaq uvz, orsber ur tb hc
gb gur uvtu cynpr gb rng: sbe gur crbcyr jvyy abg rng hagvy ur pbzr,
orpnhfr ur qbgu oyrff gur fnpevsvpr; naq nsgrejneqf gurl rng gung or
ovqqra. Abj gurersber trg lbh hc; sbe nobhg guvf gvzr lr funyy svaq
uvz.

9:14 Naq gurl jrag hc vagb gur pvgl: naq jura gurl jrer pbzr vagb gur
pvgl, orubyq, Fnzhry pnzr bhg ntnvafg gurz, sbe gb tb hc gb gur uvtu
cynpr.

9:15 Abj gur YBEQ unq gbyq Fnzhry va uvf rne n qnl orsber Fnhy pnzr,
fnlvat, 9:16 Gb zbeebj nobhg guvf gvzr V jvyy fraq gurr n zna bhg bs
gur ynaq bs Orawnzva, naq gubh funyg nabvag uvz gb or pncgnva bire zl
crbcyr Vfenry, gung ur znl fnir zl crbcyr bhg bs gur unaq bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf: sbe V unir ybbxrq hcba zl crbcyr, orpnhfr gurve pel vf
pbzr hagb zr.

9:17 Naq jura Fnzhry fnj Fnhy, gur YBEQ fnvq hagb uvz, Orubyq gur zna
jubz V fcnxr gb gurr bs! guvf fnzr funyy ervta bire zl crbcyr.

9:18 Gura Fnhy qerj arne gb Fnzhry va gur tngr, naq fnvq, Gryy zr, V
cenl gurr, jurer gur frre'f ubhfr vf.

9:19 Naq Fnzhry nafjrerq Fnhy, naq fnvq, V nz gur frre: tb hc orsber
zr hagb gur uvtu cynpr; sbe lr funyy rng jvgu zr gb qnl, naq gb zbeebj
V jvyy yrg gurr tb, naq jvyy gryy gurr nyy gung vf va guvar urneg.

9:20 Naq nf sbe guvar nffrf gung jrer ybfg guerr qnlf ntb, frg abg gul
zvaq ba gurz; sbe gurl ner sbhaq. Naq ba jubz vf nyy gur qrfver bs
Vfenry? Vf vg abg ba gurr, naq ba nyy gul sngure'f ubhfr?  9:21 Naq
Fnhy nafjrerq naq fnvq, Nz abg V n Orawnzvgr, bs gur fznyyrfg bs gur
gevorf bs Vfenry? naq zl snzvyl gur yrnfg bs nyy gur snzvyvrf bs gur
gevor bs Orawnzva? jurersber gura fcrnxrfg gubh fb gb zr?  9:22 Naq
Fnzhry gbbx Fnhy naq uvf freinag, naq oebhtug gurz vagb gur cneybhe,
naq znqr gurz fvg va gur puvrsrfg cynpr nzbat gurz gung jrer ovqqra,
juvpu jrer nobhg guvegl crefbaf.

9:23 Naq Fnzhry fnvq hagb gur pbbx, Oevat gur cbegvba juvpu V tnir
gurr, bs juvpu V fnvq hagb gurr, Frg vg ol gurr.

9:24 Naq gur pbbx gbbx hc gur fubhyqre, naq gung juvpu jnf hcba vg,
naq frg vg orsber Fnhy. Naq Fnzhry fnvq, Orubyq gung juvpu vf yrsg!
frg vg orsber gurr, naq rng: sbe hagb guvf gvzr ungu vg orra xrcg sbe
gurr fvapr V fnvq, V unir vaivgrq gur crbcyr. Fb Fnhy qvq rng jvgu
Fnzhry gung qnl.

9:25 Naq jura gurl jrer pbzr qbja sebz gur uvtu cynpr vagb gur pvgl,
Fnzhry pbzzharq jvgu Fnhy hcba gur gbc bs gur ubhfr.

9:26 Naq gurl nebfr rneyl: naq vg pnzr gb cnff nobhg gur fcevat bs gur
qnl, gung Fnzhry pnyyrq Fnhy gb gur gbc bs gur ubhfr, fnlvat, Hc, gung
V znl fraq gurr njnl. Naq Fnhy nebfr, naq gurl jrag bhg obgu bs gurz,
ur naq Fnzhry, noebnq.

9:27 Naq nf gurl jrer tbvat qbja gb gur raq bs gur pvgl, Fnzhry fnvq
gb Fnhy, Ovq gur freinag cnff ba orsber hf, (naq ur cnffrq ba), ohg
fgnaq gubh fgvyy n juvyr, gung V znl furj gurr gur jbeq bs Tbq.

10:1 Gura Fnzhry gbbx n ivny bs bvy, naq cbherq vg hcba uvf urnq, naq
xvffrq uvz, naq fnvq, Vf vg abg orpnhfr gur YBEQ ungu nabvagrq gurr gb
or pncgnva bire uvf vaurevgnapr?  10:2 Jura gubh neg qrcnegrq sebz zr
gb qnl, gura gubh funyg svaq gjb zra ol Enpury'f frchypuer va gur
obeqre bs Orawnzva ng Mrymnu; naq gurl jvyy fnl hagb gurr, Gur nffrf
juvpu gubh jragrfg gb frrx ner sbhaq: naq, yb, gul sngure ungu yrsg
gur pner bs gur nffrf, naq fbeebjrgu sbe lbh, fnlvat, Jung funyy V qb
sbe zl fba?  10:3 Gura funyg gubh tb ba sbejneq sebz gurapr, naq gubh
funyg pbzr gb gur cynva bs Gnobe, naq gurer funyy zrrg gurr guerr zra
tbvat hc gb Tbq gb Orgury, bar pneelvat guerr xvqf, naq nabgure
pneelvat guerr ybnirf bs oernq, naq nabgure pneelvat n obggyr bs jvar:
10:4 Naq gurl jvyy fnyhgr gurr, naq tvir gurr gjb ybnirf bs oernq;
juvpu gubh funyg erprvir bs gurve unaqf.

10:5 Nsgre gung gubh funyg pbzr gb gur uvyy bs Tbq, jurer vf gur
tneevfba bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf: naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, jura gubh neg
pbzr guvgure gb gur pvgl, gung gubh funyg zrrg n pbzcnal bs cebcurgf
pbzvat qbja sebz gur uvtu cynpr jvgu n cfnygrel, naq n gnoerg, naq n
cvcr, naq n unec, orsber gurz; naq gurl funyy cebcurfl: 10:6 Naq gur
Fcvevg bs gur YBEQ jvyy pbzr hcba gurr, naq gubh funyg cebcurfl jvgu
gurz, naq funyg or ghearq vagb nabgure zna.

10:7 Naq yrg vg or, jura gurfr fvtaf ner pbzr hagb gurr, gung gubh qb
nf bppnfvba freir gurr; sbe Tbq vf jvgu gurr.

10:8 Naq gubh funyg tb qbja orsber zr gb Tvytny; naq, orubyq, V jvyy
pbzr qbja hagb gurr, gb bssre oheag bssrevatf, naq gb fnpevsvpr
fnpevsvprf bs crnpr bssrevatf: frira qnlf funyg gubh gneel, gvyy V
pbzr gb gurr, naq furj gurr jung gubh funyg qb.

10:9 Naq vg jnf fb, gung jura ur unq ghearq uvf onpx gb tb sebz
Fnzhry, Tbq tnir uvz nabgure urneg: naq nyy gubfr fvtaf pnzr gb cnff
gung qnl.

10:10 Naq jura gurl pnzr guvgure gb gur uvyy, orubyq, n pbzcnal bs
cebcurgf zrg uvz; naq gur Fcvevg bs Tbq pnzr hcba uvz, naq ur
cebcurfvrq nzbat gurz.

10:11 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura nyy gung xarj uvz orsbergvzr fnj gung,
orubyq, ur cebcurfvrq nzbat gur cebcurgf, gura gur crbcyr fnvq bar gb
nabgure, Jung vf guvf gung vf pbzr hagb gur fba bs Xvfu? Vf Fnhy nyfb
nzbat gur cebcurgf?  10:12 Naq bar bs gur fnzr cynpr nafjrerq naq
fnvq, Ohg jub vf gurve sngure? Gurersber vg orpnzr n cebireo, Vf Fnhy
nyfb nzbat gur cebcurgf?  10:13 Naq jura ur unq znqr na raq bs
cebcurflvat, ur pnzr gb gur uvtu cynpr.

10:14 Naq Fnhy'f hapyr fnvq hagb uvz naq gb uvf freinag, Juvgure jrag
lr?  Naq ur fnvq, Gb frrx gur nffrf: naq jura jr fnj gung gurl jrer ab
jurer, jr pnzr gb Fnzhry.

10:15 Naq Fnhy'f hapyr fnvq, Gryy zr, V cenl gurr, jung Fnzhry fnvq
hagb lbh.

10:16 Naq Fnhy fnvq hagb uvf hapyr, Ur gbyq hf cynvayl gung gur nffrf
jrer sbhaq. Ohg bs gur znggre bs gur xvatqbz, jurerbs Fnzhry fcnxr, ur
gbyq uvz abg.

10:17 Naq Fnzhry pnyyrq gur crbcyr gbtrgure hagb gur YBEQ gb Zvmcru;
10:18 Naq fnvq hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ Tbq bs
Vfenry, V oebhtug hc Vfenry bhg bs Rtlcg, naq qryvirerq lbh bhg bs gur
unaq bs gur Rtlcgvnaf, naq bhg bs gur unaq bs nyy xvatqbzf, naq bs
gurz gung bccerffrq lbh: 10:19 Naq lr unir guvf qnl erwrpgrq lbhe Tbq,
jub uvzfrys fnirq lbh bhg bs nyy lbhe nqirefvgvrf naq lbhe
gevohyngvbaf; naq lr unir fnvq hagb uvz, Anl, ohg frg n xvat bire hf.
Abj gurersber cerfrag lbhefryirf orsber gur YBEQ ol lbhe gevorf, naq
ol lbhe gubhfnaqf.

10:20 Naq jura Fnzhry unq pnhfrq nyy gur gevorf bs Vfenry gb pbzr
arne, gur gevor bs Orawnzva jnf gnxra.

10:21 Jura ur unq pnhfrq gur gevor bs Orawnzva gb pbzr arne ol gurve
snzvyvrf, gur snzvyl bs Zngev jnf gnxra, naq Fnhy gur fba bs Xvfu jnf
gnxra: naq jura gurl fbhtug uvz, ur pbhyq abg or sbhaq.

10:22 Gurersber gurl radhverq bs gur YBEQ shegure, vs gur zna fubhyq
lrg pbzr guvgure. Naq gur YBEQ nafjrerq, Orubyq ur ungu uvq uvzfrys
nzbat gur fghss.

10:23 Naq gurl ena naq srgpurq uvz gurapr: naq jura ur fgbbq nzbat gur
crbcyr, ur jnf uvture guna nal bs gur crbcyr sebz uvf fubhyqref naq
hcjneq.

10:24 Naq Fnzhry fnvq gb nyy gur crbcyr, Frr lr uvz jubz gur YBEQ ungu
pubfra, gung gurer vf abar yvxr uvz nzbat nyy gur crbcyr? Naq nyy gur
crbcyr fubhgrq, naq fnvq, Tbq fnir gur xvat.

10:25 Gura Fnzhry gbyq gur crbcyr gur znaare bs gur xvatqbz, naq jebgr
vg va n obbx, naq ynvq vg hc orsber gur YBEQ. Naq Fnzhry frag nyy gur
crbcyr njnl, rirel zna gb uvf ubhfr.

10:26 Naq Fnhy nyfb jrag ubzr gb Tvornu; naq gurer jrag jvgu uvz n
onaq bs zra, jubfr urnegf Tbq unq gbhpurq.

10:27 Ohg gur puvyqera bs Oryvny fnvq, Ubj funyy guvf zna fnir hf? Naq
gurl qrfcvfrq uvz, naq oebhtug ab cerfragf. Ohg ur uryq uvf crnpr.

11:1 Gura Anunfu gur Nzzbavgr pnzr hc, naq rapnzcrq ntnvafg
Wnorfutvyrnq: naq nyy gur zra bs Wnorfu fnvq hagb Anunfu, Znxr n
pbiranag jvgu hf, naq jr jvyy freir gurr.

11:2 Naq Anunfu gur Nzzbavgr nafjrerq gurz, Ba guvf pbaqvgvba jvyy V
znxr n pbiranag jvgu lbh, gung V znl guehfg bhg nyy lbhe evtug rlrf,
naq ynl vg sbe n ercebnpu hcba nyy Vfenry.

11:3 Naq gur ryqref bs Wnorfu fnvq hagb uvz, Tvir hf frira qnlf'
erfcvgr, gung jr znl fraq zrffratref hagb nyy gur pbnfgf bs Vfenry:
naq gura, vs gurer or ab zna gb fnir hf, jr jvyy pbzr bhg gb gurr.

11:4 Gura pnzr gur zrffratref gb Tvornu bs Fnhy, naq gbyq gur gvqvatf
va gur rnef bs gur crbcyr: naq nyy gur crbcyr yvsgrq hc gurve ibvprf,
naq jrcg.

11:5 Naq, orubyq, Fnhy pnzr nsgre gur ureq bhg bs gur svryq; naq Fnhy
fnvq, Jung nvyrgu gur crbcyr gung gurl jrrc? Naq gurl gbyq uvz gur
gvqvatf bs gur zra bs Wnorfu.

11:6 Naq gur Fcvevg bs Tbq pnzr hcba Fnhy jura ur urneq gubfr gvqvatf,
naq uvf natre jnf xvaqyrq terngyl.

11:7 Naq ur gbbx n lbxr bs bkra, naq urjrq gurz va cvrprf, naq frag
gurz guebhtubhg nyy gur pbnfgf bs Vfenry ol gur unaqf bs zrffratref,
fnlvat, Jubfbrire pbzrgu abg sbegu nsgre Fnhy naq nsgre Fnzhry, fb
funyy vg or qbar hagb uvf bkra. Naq gur srne bs gur YBEQ sryy ba gur
crbcyr, naq gurl pnzr bhg jvgu bar pbafrag.

11:8 Naq jura ur ahzorerq gurz va Ormrx, gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jrer
guerr uhaqerq gubhfnaq, naq gur zra bs Whqnu guvegl gubhfnaq.

11:9 Naq gurl fnvq hagb gur zrffratref gung pnzr, Guhf funyy lr fnl
hagb gur zra bs Wnorfutvyrnq, Gb zbeebj, ol gung gvzr gur fha or ubg,
lr funyy unir uryc. Naq gur zrffratref pnzr naq furjrq vg gb gur zra
bs Wnorfu; naq gurl jrer tynq.

11:10 Gurersber gur zra bs Wnorfu fnvq, Gb zbeebj jr jvyy pbzr bhg
hagb lbh, naq lr funyy qb jvgu hf nyy gung frrzrgu tbbq hagb lbh.

11:11 Naq vg jnf fb ba gur zbeebj, gung Fnhy chg gur crbcyr va guerr
pbzcnavrf; naq gurl pnzr vagb gur zvqfg bs gur ubfg va gur zbeavat
jngpu, naq fyrj gur Nzzbavgrf hagvy gur urng bs gur qnl: naq vg pnzr
gb cnff, gung gurl juvpu erznvarq jrer fpnggrerq, fb gung gjb bs gurz
jrer abg yrsg gbtrgure.

11:12 Naq gur crbcyr fnvq hagb Fnzhry, Jub vf ur gung fnvq, Funyy Fnhy
ervta bire hf? oevat gur zra, gung jr znl chg gurz gb qrngu.

11:13 Naq Fnhy fnvq, Gurer funyy abg n zna or chg gb qrngu guvf qnl:
sbe gb qnl gur YBEQ ungu jebhtug fnyingvba va Vfenry.

11:14 Gura fnvq Fnzhry gb gur crbcyr, Pbzr, naq yrg hf tb gb Tvytny,
naq erarj gur xvatqbz gurer.

11:15 Naq nyy gur crbcyr jrag gb Tvytny; naq gurer gurl znqr Fnhy xvat
orsber gur YBEQ va Tvytny; naq gurer gurl fnpevsvprq fnpevsvprf bs
crnpr bssrevatf orsber gur YBEQ; naq gurer Fnhy naq nyy gur zra bs
Vfenry erwbvprq terngyl.

12:1 Naq Fnzhry fnvq hagb nyy Vfenry, Orubyq, V unir urnexrarq hagb
lbhe ibvpr va nyy gung lr fnvq hagb zr, naq unir znqr n xvat bire lbh.

12:2 Naq abj, orubyq, gur xvat jnyxrgu orsber lbh: naq V nz byq naq
tenlurnqrq; naq, orubyq, zl fbaf ner jvgu lbh: naq V unir jnyxrq
orsber lbh sebz zl puvyqubbq hagb guvf qnl.

12:3 Orubyq, urer V nz: jvgarff ntnvafg zr orsber gur YBEQ, naq orsber
uvf nabvagrq: jubfr bk unir V gnxra? be jubfr nff unir V gnxra? be
jubz unir V qrsenhqrq? jubz unir V bccerffrq? be bs jubfr unaq unir V
erprvirq nal oevor gb oyvaq zvar rlrf gurerjvgu? naq V jvyy erfgber vg
lbh.

12:4 Naq gurl fnvq, Gubh unfg abg qrsenhqrq hf, abe bccerffrq hf,
arvgure unfg gubh gnxra bhtug bs nal zna'f unaq.

12:5 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Gur YBEQ vf jvgarff ntnvafg lbh, naq uvf
nabvagrq vf jvgarff guvf qnl, gung lr unir abg sbhaq bhtug va zl unaq.
Naq gurl nafjrerq, Ur vf jvgarff.

12:6 Naq Fnzhry fnvq hagb gur crbcyr, Vg vf gur YBEQ gung nqinaprq
Zbfrf naq Nneba, naq gung oebhtug lbhe snguref hc bhg bs gur ynaq bs
Rtlcg.

12:7 Abj gurersber fgnaq fgvyy, gung V znl ernfba jvgu lbh orsber gur
YBEQ bs nyy gur evtugrbhf npgf bs gur YBEQ, juvpu ur qvq gb lbh naq gb
lbhe snguref.

12:8 Jura Wnpbo jnf pbzr vagb Rtlcg, naq lbhe snguref pevrq hagb gur
YBEQ, gura gur YBEQ frag Zbfrf naq Nneba, juvpu oebhtug sbegu lbhe
snguref bhg bs Rtlcg, naq znqr gurz qjryy va guvf cynpr.

12:9 Naq jura gurl sbetng gur YBEQ gurve Tbq, ur fbyq gurz vagb gur
unaq bs Fvfren, pncgnva bs gur ubfg bs Unmbe, naq vagb gur unaq bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf, naq vagb gur unaq bs gur xvat bs Zbno, naq gurl sbhtug
ntnvafg gurz.

12:10 Naq gurl pevrq hagb gur YBEQ, naq fnvq, Jr unir fvaarq, orpnhfr
jr unir sbefnxra gur YBEQ, naq unir freirq Onnyvz naq Nfugnebgu: ohg
abj qryvire hf bhg bs gur unaq bs bhe rarzvrf, naq jr jvyy freir gurr.

12:11 Naq gur YBEQ frag Wrehoonny, naq Orqna, naq Wrcugunu, naq
Fnzhry, naq qryvirerq lbh bhg bs gur unaq bs lbhe rarzvrf ba rirel
fvqr, naq lr qjryyrq fnsr.

12:12 Naq jura lr fnj gung Anunfu gur xvat bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba
pnzr ntnvafg lbh, lr fnvq hagb zr, Anl; ohg n xvat funyy ervta bire
hf: jura gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq jnf lbhe xvat.

12:13 Abj gurersber orubyq gur xvat jubz lr unir pubfra, naq jubz lr
unir qrfverq! naq, orubyq, gur YBEQ ungu frg n xvat bire lbh.

12:14 Vs lr jvyy srne gur YBEQ, naq freir uvz, naq borl uvf ibvpr, naq
abg erory ntnvafg gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ, gura funyy obgu lr naq
nyfb gur xvat gung ervtargu bire lbh pbagvahr sbyybjvat gur YBEQ lbhe
Tbq: 12:15 Ohg vs lr jvyy abg borl gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ, ohg erory
ntnvafg gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ, gura funyy gur unaq bs gur YBEQ
or ntnvafg lbh, nf vg jnf ntnvafg lbhe snguref.

12:16 Abj gurersber fgnaq naq frr guvf terng guvat, juvpu gur YBEQ
jvyy qb orsber lbhe rlrf.

12:17 Vf vg abg jurng uneirfg gb qnl? V jvyy pnyy hagb gur YBEQ, naq
ur funyy fraq guhaqre naq enva; gung lr znl creprvir naq frr gung lbhe
jvpxrqarff vf terng, juvpu lr unir qbar va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, va
nfxvat lbh n xvat.

12:18 Fb Fnzhry pnyyrq hagb gur YBEQ; naq gur YBEQ frag guhaqre naq
enva gung qnl: naq nyy gur crbcyr terngyl srnerq gur YBEQ naq Fnzhry.

12:19 Naq nyy gur crbcyr fnvq hagb Fnzhry, Cenl sbe gul freinagf hagb
gur YBEQ gul Tbq, gung jr qvr abg: sbe jr unir nqqrq hagb nyy bhe fvaf
guvf rivy, gb nfx hf n xvat.

12:20 Naq Fnzhry fnvq hagb gur crbcyr, Srne abg: lr unir qbar nyy guvf
jvpxrqarff: lrg ghea abg nfvqr sebz sbyybjvat gur YBEQ, ohg freir gur
YBEQ jvgu nyy lbhe urneg; 12:21 Naq ghea lr abg nfvqr: sbe gura fubhyq
lr tb nsgre inva guvatf, juvpu pnaabg cebsvg abe qryvire; sbe gurl ner
inva.

12:22 Sbe gur YBEQ jvyy abg sbefnxr uvf crbcyr sbe uvf terng anzr'f
fnxr: orpnhfr vg ungu cyrnfrq gur YBEQ gb znxr lbh uvf crbcyr.

12:23 Zberbire nf sbe zr, Tbq sbeovq gung V fubhyq fva ntnvafg gur
YBEQ va prnfvat gb cenl sbe lbh: ohg V jvyy grnpu lbh gur tbbq naq gur
evtug jnl: 12:24 Bayl srne gur YBEQ, naq freir uvz va gehgu jvgu nyy
lbhe urneg: sbe pbafvqre ubj terng guvatf ur ungu qbar sbe lbh.

12:25 Ohg vs lr funyy fgvyy qb jvpxrqyl, lr funyy or pbafhzrq, obgu lr
naq lbhe xvat.

13:1 Fnhy ervtarq bar lrne; naq jura ur unq ervtarq gjb lrnef bire
Vfenry, 13:2 Fnhy pubfr uvz guerr gubhfnaq zra bs Vfenry; jurerbs gjb
gubhfnaq jrer jvgu Fnhy va Zvpuznfu naq va zbhag Orgury, naq n
gubhfnaq jrer jvgu Wbanguna va Tvornu bs Orawnzva: naq gur erfg bs gur
crbcyr ur frag rirel zna gb uvf grag.

13:3 Naq Wbanguna fzbgr gur tneevfba bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf gung jnf va
Tron, naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf urneq bs vg. Naq Fnhy oyrj gur gehzcrg
guebhtubhg nyy gur ynaq, fnlvat, Yrg gur Uroerjf urne.

13:4 Naq nyy Vfenry urneq fnl gung Fnhy unq fzvggra n tneevfba bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf, naq gung Vfenry nyfb jnf unq va nobzvangvba jvgu gur
Cuvyvfgvarf. Naq gur crbcyr jrer pnyyrq gbtrgure nsgre Fnhy gb Tvytny.

13:5 Naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure gb svtug jvgu
Vfenry, guvegl gubhfnaq punevbgf, naq fvk gubhfnaq ubefrzra, naq
crbcyr nf gur fnaq juvpu vf ba gur frn fuber va zhygvghqr: naq gurl
pnzr hc, naq cvgpurq va Zvpuznfu, rnfgjneq sebz Orgunira.

13:6 Jura gur zra bs Vfenry fnj gung gurl jrer va n fgenvg, (sbe gur
crbcyr jrer qvfgerffrq,) gura gur crbcyr qvq uvqr gurzfryirf va pnirf,
naq va guvpxrgf, naq va ebpxf, naq va uvtu cynprf, naq va cvgf.

13:7 Naq fbzr bs gur Uroerjf jrag bire Wbeqna gb gur ynaq bs Tnq naq
Tvyrnq. Nf sbe Fnhy, ur jnf lrg va Tvytny, naq nyy gur crbcyr sbyybjrq
uvz gerzoyvat.

13:8 Naq ur gneevrq frira qnlf, nppbeqvat gb gur frg gvzr gung Fnzhry
unq nccbvagrq: ohg Fnzhry pnzr abg gb Tvytny; naq gur crbcyr jrer
fpnggrerq sebz uvz.

13:9 Naq Fnhy fnvq, Oevat uvgure n oheag bssrevat gb zr, naq crnpr
bssrevatf. Naq ur bssrerq gur oheag bssrevat.

13:10 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung nf fbba nf ur unq znqr na raq bs
bssrevat gur oheag bssrevat, orubyq, Fnzhry pnzr; naq Fnhy jrag bhg gb
zrrg uvz, gung ur zvtug fnyhgr uvz.

13:11 Naq Fnzhry fnvq, Jung unfg gubh qbar? Naq Fnhy fnvq, Orpnhfr V
fnj gung gur crbcyr jrer fpnggrerq sebz zr, naq gung gubh pnzrfg abg
jvguva gur qnlf nccbvagrq, naq gung gur Cuvyvfgvarf tngurerq
gurzfryirf gbtrgure ng Zvpuznfu; 13:12 Gurersber fnvq V, Gur
Cuvyvfgvarf jvyy pbzr qbja abj hcba zr gb Tvytny, naq V unir abg znqr
fhccyvpngvba hagb gur YBEQ: V sbeprq zlfrys gurersber, naq bssrerq n
oheag bssrevat.

13:13 Naq Fnzhry fnvq gb Fnhy, Gubh unfg qbar sbbyvfuyl: gubh unfg abg
xrcg gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq, juvpu ur pbzznaqrq gurr: sbe
abj jbhyq gur YBEQ unir rfgnoyvfurq gul xvatqbz hcba Vfenry sbe rire.

13:14 Ohg abj gul xvatqbz funyy abg pbagvahr: gur YBEQ ungu fbhtug uvz
n zna nsgre uvf bja urneg, naq gur YBEQ ungu pbzznaqrq uvz gb or
pncgnva bire uvf crbcyr, orpnhfr gubh unfg abg xrcg gung juvpu gur
YBEQ pbzznaqrq gurr.

13:15 Naq Fnzhry nebfr, naq tng uvz hc sebz Tvytny hagb Tvornu bs
Orawnzva. Naq Fnhy ahzorerq gur crbcyr gung jrer cerfrag jvgu uvz,
nobhg fvk uhaqerq zra.

13:16 Naq Fnhy, naq Wbanguna uvf fba, naq gur crbcyr gung jrer cerfrag
jvgu gurz, nobqr va Tvornu bs Orawnzva: ohg gur Cuvyvfgvarf rapnzcrq
va Zvpuznfu.

13:17 Naq gur fcbvyref pnzr bhg bs gur pnzc bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf va
guerr pbzcnavrf: bar pbzcnal ghearq hagb gur jnl gung yrnqrgu gb
Bcuenu, hagb gur ynaq bs Fuhny: 13:18 Naq nabgure pbzcnal ghearq gur
jnl gb Orguubeba: naq nabgure pbzcnal ghearq gb gur jnl bs gur obeqre
gung ybbxrgu gb gur inyyrl bs Mrobvz gbjneq gur jvyqrearff.

13:19 Abj gurer jnf ab fzvgu sbhaq guebhtubhg nyy gur ynaq bs Vfenry:
sbe gur Cuvyvfgvarf fnvq, Yrfg gur Uroerjf znxr gurz fjbeqf be fcrnef:
13:20 Ohg nyy gur Vfenryvgrf jrag qbja gb gur Cuvyvfgvarf, gb funecra
rirel zna uvf funer, naq uvf pbhygre, naq uvf nkr, naq uvf znggbpx.

13:21 Lrg gurl unq n svyr sbe gur znggbpxf, naq sbe gur pbhygref, naq
sbe gur sbexf, naq sbe gur nkrf, naq gb funecra gur tbnqf.

13:22 Fb vg pnzr gb cnff va gur qnl bs onggyr, gung gurer jnf arvgure
fjbeq abe fcrne sbhaq va gur unaq bs nal bs gur crbcyr gung jrer jvgu
Fnhy naq Wbanguna: ohg jvgu Fnhy naq jvgu Wbanguna uvf fba jnf gurer
sbhaq.

13:23 Naq gur tneevfba bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf jrag bhg gb gur cnffntr bs
Zvpuznfu.

14:1 Abj vg pnzr gb cnff hcba n qnl, gung Wbanguna gur fba bs Fnhy
fnvq hagb gur lbhat zna gung oner uvf nezbhe, Pbzr, naq yrg hf tb bire
gb gur Cuvyvfgvarf' tneevfba, gung vf ba gur bgure fvqr. Ohg ur gbyq
abg uvf sngure.

14:2 Naq Fnhy gneevrq va gur hggrezbfg cneg bs Tvornu haqre n
cbzrtenangr gerr juvpu vf va Zvteba: naq gur crbcyr gung jrer jvgu uvz
jrer nobhg fvk uhaqerq zra; 14:3 Naq Nuvnu, gur fba bs Nuvgho,
Vpunobq'f oebgure, gur fba bs Cuvarunf, gur fba bs Ryv, gur YBEQ'f
cevrfg va Fuvybu, jrnevat na rcubq. Naq gur crbcyr xarj abg gung
Wbanguna jnf tbar.

14:4 Naq orgjrra gur cnffntrf, ol juvpu Wbanguna fbhtug gb tb bire
hagb gur Cuvyvfgvarf' tneevfba, gurer jnf n funec ebpx ba gur bar
fvqr, naq n funec ebpx ba gur bgure fvqr: naq gur anzr bs gur bar jnf
Obmrm, naq gur anzr bs gur bgure Fraru.

14:5 Gur sbersebag bs gur bar jnf fvghngr abegujneq bire ntnvafg
Zvpuznfu, naq gur bgure fbhgujneq bire ntnvafg Tvornu.

14:6 Naq Wbanguna fnvq gb gur lbhat zna gung oner uvf nezbhe, Pbzr,
naq yrg hf tb bire hagb gur tneevfba bs gurfr hapvephzpvfrq: vg znl or
gung gur YBEQ jvyy jbex sbe hf: sbe gurer vf ab erfgenvag gb gur YBEQ
gb fnir ol znal be ol srj.

14:7 Naq uvf nezbheornere fnvq hagb uvz, Qb nyy gung vf va guvar
urneg: ghea gurr; orubyq, V nz jvgu gurr nppbeqvat gb gul urneg.

14:8 Gura fnvq Wbanguna, Orubyq, jr jvyy cnff bire hagb gurfr zra, naq
jr jvyy qvfpbire bhefryirf hagb gurz.

14:9 Vs gurl fnl guhf hagb hf, Gneel hagvy jr pbzr gb lbh; gura jr
jvyy fgnaq fgvyy va bhe cynpr, naq jvyy abg tb hc hagb gurz.

14:10 Ohg vs gurl fnl guhf, Pbzr hc hagb hf; gura jr jvyy tb hc: sbe
gur YBEQ ungu qryvirerq gurz vagb bhe unaq: naq guvf funyy or n fvta
hagb hf.

14:11 Naq obgu bs gurz qvfpbirerq gurzfryirf hagb gur tneevfba bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf: naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf fnvq, Orubyq, gur Uroerjf pbzr sbegu
bhg bs gur ubyrf jurer gurl unq uvq gurzfryirf.

14:12 Naq gur zra bs gur tneevfba nafjrerq Wbanguna naq uvf
nezbheornere, naq fnvq, Pbzr hc gb hf, naq jr jvyy furj lbh n guvat.
Naq Wbanguna fnvq hagb uvf nezbheornere, Pbzr hc nsgre zr: sbe gur
YBEQ ungu qryvirerq gurz vagb gur unaq bs Vfenry.

14:13 Naq Wbanguna pyvzorq hc hcba uvf unaqf naq hcba uvf srrg, naq
uvf nezbheornere nsgre uvz: naq gurl sryy orsber Wbanguna; naq uvf
nezbheornere fyrj nsgre uvz.

14:14 Naq gung svefg fynhtugre, juvpu Wbanguna naq uvf nezbheornere
znqr, jnf nobhg gjragl zra, jvguva nf vg jrer na unys nper bs ynaq,
juvpu n lbxr bs bkra zvtug cybj.

14:15 Naq gurer jnf gerzoyvat va gur ubfg, va gur svryq, naq nzbat nyy
gur crbcyr: gur tneevfba, naq gur fcbvyref, gurl nyfb gerzoyrq, naq
gur rnegu dhnxrq: fb vg jnf n irel terng gerzoyvat.

14:16 Naq gur jngpuzra bs Fnhy va Tvornu bs Orawnzva ybbxrq; naq,
orubyq, gur zhygvghqr zrygrq njnl, naq gurl jrag ba orngvat qbja bar
nabgure.

14:17 Gura fnvq Fnhy hagb gur crbcyr gung jrer jvgu uvz, Ahzore abj,
naq frr jub vf tbar sebz hf. Naq jura gurl unq ahzorerq, orubyq,
Wbanguna naq uvf nezbheornere jrer abg gurer.

14:18 Naq Fnhy fnvq hagb Nuvnu, Oevat uvgure gur nex bs Tbq. Sbe gur
nex bs Tbq jnf ng gung gvzr jvgu gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

14:19 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, juvyr Fnhy gnyxrq hagb gur cevrfg, gung gur
abvfr gung jnf va gur ubfg bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf jrag ba naq vapernfrq:
naq Fnhy fnvq hagb gur cevrfg, Jvguqenj guvar unaq.

14:20 Naq Fnhy naq nyy gur crbcyr gung jrer jvgu uvz nffrzoyrq
gurzfryirf, naq gurl pnzr gb gur onggyr: naq, orubyq, rirel zna'f
fjbeq jnf ntnvafg uvf sryybj, naq gurer jnf n irel terng qvfpbzsvgher.

14:21 Zberbire gur Uroerjf gung jrer jvgu gur Cuvyvfgvarf orsber gung
gvzr, juvpu jrag hc jvgu gurz vagb gur pnzc sebz gur pbhagel ebhaq
nobhg, rira gurl nyfb ghearq gb or jvgu gur Vfenryvgrf gung jrer jvgu
Fnhy naq Wbanguna.

14:22 Yvxrjvfr nyy gur zra bs Vfenry juvpu unq uvq gurzfryirf va zbhag
Rcuenvz, jura gurl urneq gung gur Cuvyvfgvarf syrq, rira gurl nyfb
sbyybjrq uneq nsgre gurz va gur onggyr.

14:23 Fb gur YBEQ fnirq Vfenry gung qnl: naq gur onggyr cnffrq bire
hagb Orgunira.

14:24 Naq gur zra bs Vfenry jrer qvfgerffrq gung qnl: sbe Fnhy unq
nqwherq gur crbcyr, fnlvat, Phefrq or gur zna gung rngrgu nal sbbq
hagvy riravat, gung V znl or niratrq ba zvar rarzvrf. Fb abar bs gur
crbcyr gnfgrq nal sbbq.

14:25 Naq nyy gurl bs gur ynaq pnzr gb n jbbq; naq gurer jnf ubarl
hcba gur tebhaq.

14:26 Naq jura gur crbcyr jrer pbzr vagb gur jbbq, orubyq, gur ubarl
qebccrq; ohg ab zna chg uvf unaq gb uvf zbhgu: sbe gur crbcyr srnerq
gur bngu.

14:27 Ohg Wbanguna urneq abg jura uvf sngure punetrq gur crbcyr jvgu
gur bngu: jurersber ur chg sbegu gur raq bs gur ebq gung jnf va uvf
unaq, naq qvccrq vg va na ubarlpbzo, naq chg uvf unaq gb uvf zbhgu;
naq uvf rlrf jrer rayvtugrarq.

14:28 Gura nafjrerq bar bs gur crbcyr, naq fnvq, Gul sngure fgenvgyl
punetrq gur crbcyr jvgu na bngu, fnlvat, Phefrq or gur zna gung rngrgu
nal sbbq guvf qnl. Naq gur crbcyr jrer snvag.

14:29 Gura fnvq Wbanguna, Zl sngure ungu gebhoyrq gur ynaq: frr, V
cenl lbh, ubj zvar rlrf unir orra rayvtugrarq, orpnhfr V gnfgrq n
yvggyr bs guvf ubarl.

14:30 Ubj zhpu zber, vs uncyl gur crbcyr unq rngra serryl gb qnl bs
gur fcbvy bs gurve rarzvrf juvpu gurl sbhaq? sbe unq gurer abg orra
abj n zhpu terngre fynhtugre nzbat gur Cuvyvfgvarf?  14:31 Naq gurl
fzbgr gur Cuvyvfgvarf gung qnl sebz Zvpuznfu gb Nvwnyba: naq gur
crbcyr jrer irel snvag.

14:32 Naq gur crbcyr syrj hcba gur fcbvy, naq gbbx furrc, naq bkra,
naq pnyirf, naq fyrj gurz ba gur tebhaq: naq gur crbcyr qvq rng gurz
jvgu gur oybbq.

14:33 Gura gurl gbyq Fnhy, fnlvat, Orubyq, gur crbcyr fva ntnvafg gur
YBEQ, va gung gurl rng jvgu gur oybbq. Naq ur fnvq, Lr unir
genafterffrq: ebyy n terng fgbar hagb zr guvf qnl.

14:34 Naq Fnhy fnvq, Qvfcrefr lbhefryirf nzbat gur crbcyr, naq fnl
hagb gurz, Oevat zr uvgure rirel zna uvf bk, naq rirel zna uvf furrc,
naq fynl gurz urer, naq rng; naq fva abg ntnvafg gur YBEQ va rngvat
jvgu gur oybbq.

Naq nyy gur crbcyr oebhtug rirel zna uvf bk jvgu uvz gung avtug, naq
fyrj gurz gurer.

14:35 Naq Fnhy ohvyg na nygne hagb gur YBEQ: gur fnzr jnf gur svefg
nygne gung ur ohvyg hagb gur YBEQ.

14:36 Naq Fnhy fnvq, Yrg hf tb qbja nsgre gur Cuvyvfgvarf ol avtug,
naq fcbvy gurz hagvy gur zbeavat yvtug, naq yrg hf abg yrnir n zna bs
gurz. Naq gurl fnvq, Qb jungfbrire frrzrgu tbbq hagb gurr. Gura fnvq
gur cevrfg, Yrg hf qenj arne uvgure hagb Tbq.

14:37 Naq Fnhy nfxrq pbhafry bs Tbq, Funyy V tb qbja nsgre gur
Cuvyvfgvarf? jvyg gubh qryvire gurz vagb gur unaq bs Vfenry? Ohg ur
nafjrerq uvz abg gung qnl.

14:38 Naq Fnhy fnvq, Qenj lr arne uvgure, nyy gur puvrs bs gur crbcyr:
naq xabj naq frr jurerva guvf fva ungu orra guvf qnl.

14:39 Sbe, nf gur YBEQ yvirgu, juvpu fnirgu Vfenry, gubhtu vg or va
Wbanguna zl fba, ur funyy fheryl qvr. Ohg gurer jnf abg n zna nzbat
nyy gur crbcyr gung nafjrerq uvz.

14:40 Gura fnvq ur hagb nyy Vfenry, Or lr ba bar fvqr, naq V naq
Wbanguna zl fba jvyy or ba gur bgure fvqr. Naq gur crbcyr fnvq hagb
Fnhy, Qb jung frrzrgu tbbq hagb gurr.

14:41 Gurersber Fnhy fnvq hagb gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, Tvir n cresrpg
ybg.

Naq Fnhy naq Wbanguna jrer gnxra: ohg gur crbcyr rfpncrq.

14:42 Naq Fnhy fnvq, Pnfg ybgf orgjrra zr naq Wbanguna zl fba. Naq
Wbanguna jnf gnxra.

14:43 Gura Fnhy fnvq gb Wbanguna, Gryy zr jung gubh unfg qbar. Naq
Wbanguna gbyq uvz, naq fnvq, V qvq ohg gnfgr n yvggyr ubarl jvgu gur
raq bs gur ebq gung jnf va zvar unaq, naq, yb, V zhfg qvr.

14:44 Naq Fnhy nafjrerq, Tbq qb fb naq zber nyfb: sbe gubh funyg
fheryl qvr, Wbanguna.

14:45 Naq gur crbcyr fnvq hagb Fnhy, Funyy Wbanguna qvr, jub ungu
jebhtug guvf terng fnyingvba va Vfenry? Tbq sbeovq: nf gur YBEQ
yvirgu, gurer funyy abg bar unve bs uvf urnq snyy gb gur tebhaq; sbe
ur ungu jebhtug jvgu Tbq guvf qnl. Fb gur crbcyr erfphrq Wbanguna,
gung ur qvrq abg.

14:46 Gura Fnhy jrag hc sebz sbyybjvat gur Cuvyvfgvarf: naq gur
Cuvyvfgvarf jrag gb gurve bja cynpr.

14:47 Fb Fnhy gbbx gur xvatqbz bire Vfenry, naq sbhtug ntnvafg nyy uvf
rarzvrf ba rirel fvqr, ntnvafg Zbno, naq ntnvafg gur puvyqera bs
Nzzba, naq ntnvafg Rqbz, naq ntnvafg gur xvatf bs Mbonu, naq ntnvafg
gur Cuvyvfgvarf: naq juvgurefbrire ur ghearq uvzfrys, ur irkrq gurz.

14:48 Naq ur tngurerq na ubfg, naq fzbgr gur Nznyrxvgrf, naq qryvirerq
Vfenry bhg bs gur unaqf bs gurz gung fcbvyrq gurz.

14:49 Abj gur fbaf bs Fnhy jrer Wbanguna, naq Vfuhv, naq Zrypuvfuhn:
naq gur anzrf bs uvf gjb qnhtugref jrer gurfr; gur anzr bs gur
svefgobea Zreno, naq gur anzr bs gur lbhatre Zvpuny: 14:50 Naq gur
anzr bs Fnhy'f jvsr jnf Nuvabnz, gur qnhtugre bs Nuvznnm: naq gur anzr
bs gur pncgnva bs uvf ubfg jnf Noare, gur fba bs Are, Fnhy'f hapyr.

14:51 Naq Xvfu jnf gur sngure bs Fnhy; naq Are gur sngure bs Noare jnf
gur fba bs Novry.

14:52 Naq gurer jnf fber jne ntnvafg gur Cuvyvfgvarf nyy gur qnlf bs
Fnhy: naq jura Fnhy fnj nal fgebat zna, be nal inyvnag zna, ur gbbx
uvz hagb uvz.

15:1 Fnzhry nyfb fnvq hagb Fnhy, Gur YBEQ frag zr gb nabvag gurr gb or
xvat bire uvf crbcyr, bire Vfenry: abj gurersber urnexra gubh hagb gur
ibvpr bs gur jbeqf bs gur YBEQ.

15:2 Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ bs ubfgf, V erzrzore gung juvpu Nznyrx qvq gb
Vfenry, ubj ur ynvq jnvg sbe uvz va gur jnl, jura ur pnzr hc sebz
Rtlcg.

15:3 Abj tb naq fzvgr Nznyrx, naq hggreyl qrfgebl nyy gung gurl unir,
naq fcner gurz abg; ohg fynl obgu zna naq jbzna, vasnag naq fhpxyvat,
bk naq furrc, pnzry naq nff.

15:4 Naq Fnhy tngurerq gur crbcyr gbtrgure, naq ahzorerq gurz va
Grynvz, gjb uhaqerq gubhfnaq sbbgzra, naq gra gubhfnaq zra bs Whqnu.

15:5 Naq Fnhy pnzr gb n pvgl bs Nznyrx, naq ynvq jnvg va gur inyyrl.

15:6 Naq Fnhy fnvq hagb gur Xravgrf, Tb, qrcneg, trg lbh qbja sebz
nzbat gur Nznyrxvgrf, yrfg V qrfgebl lbh jvgu gurz: sbe lr furjrq
xvaqarff gb nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, jura gurl pnzr hc bhg bs
Rtlcg. Fb gur Xravgrf qrcnegrq sebz nzbat gur Nznyrxvgrf.

15:7 Naq Fnhy fzbgr gur Nznyrxvgrf sebz Univynu hagvy gubh pbzrfg gb
Fuhe, gung vf bire ntnvafg Rtlcg.

15:8 Naq ur gbbx Ntnt gur xvat bs gur Nznyrxvgrf nyvir, naq hggreyl
qrfgeblrq nyy gur crbcyr jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq.

15:9 Ohg Fnhy naq gur crbcyr fcnerq Ntnt, naq gur orfg bs gur furrc,
naq bs gur bkra, naq bs gur sngyvatf, naq gur ynzof, naq nyy gung jnf
tbbq, naq jbhyq abg hggreyl qrfgebl gurz: ohg rirel guvat gung jnf
ivyr naq ershfr, gung gurl qrfgeblrq hggreyl.

15:10 Gura pnzr gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ hagb Fnzhry, fnlvat, 15:11 Vg
ercragrgu zr gung V unir frg hc Fnhy gb or xvat: sbe ur vf ghearq onpx
sebz sbyybjvat zr, naq ungu abg cresbezrq zl pbzznaqzragf. Naq vg
tevrirq Fnzhry; naq ur pevrq hagb gur YBEQ nyy avtug.

15:12 Naq jura Fnzhry ebfr rneyl gb zrrg Fnhy va gur zbeavat, vg jnf
gbyq Fnzhry, fnlvat, Fnhy pnzr gb Pnezry, naq, orubyq, ur frg uvz hc n
cynpr, naq vf tbar nobhg, naq cnffrq ba, naq tbar qbja gb Tvytny.

15:13 Naq Fnzhry pnzr gb Fnhy: naq Fnhy fnvq hagb uvz, Oyrffrq or gubh
bs gur YBEQ: V unir cresbezrq gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ.

15:14 Naq Fnzhry fnvq, Jung zrnargu gura guvf oyrngvat bs gur furrc va
zvar rnef, naq gur ybjvat bs gur bkra juvpu V urne?  15:15 Naq Fnhy
fnvq, Gurl unir oebhtug gurz sebz gur Nznyrxvgrf: sbe gur crbcyr
fcnerq gur orfg bs gur furrc naq bs gur bkra, gb fnpevsvpr hagb gur
YBEQ gul Tbq; naq gur erfg jr unir hggreyl qrfgeblrq.

15:16 Gura Fnzhry fnvq hagb Fnhy, Fgnl, naq V jvyy gryy gurr jung gur
YBEQ ungu fnvq gb zr guvf avtug. Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Fnl ba.

15:17 Naq Fnzhry fnvq, Jura gubh jnfg yvggyr va guvar bja fvtug, jnfg
gubh abg znqr gur urnq bs gur gevorf bs Vfenry, naq gur YBEQ nabvagrq
gurr xvat bire Vfenry?  15:18 Naq gur YBEQ frag gurr ba n wbhearl, naq
fnvq, Tb naq hggreyl qrfgebl gur fvaaref gur Nznyrxvgrf, naq svtug
ntnvafg gurz hagvy gurl or pbafhzrq.

15:19 Jurersber gura qvqfg gubh abg borl gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ, ohg
qvqfg syl hcba gur fcbvy, naq qvqfg rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ?
15:20 Naq Fnhy fnvq hagb Fnzhry, Lrn, V unir borlrq gur ibvpr bs gur
YBEQ, naq unir tbar gur jnl juvpu gur YBEQ frag zr, naq unir oebhtug
Ntnt gur xvat bs Nznyrx, naq unir hggreyl qrfgeblrq gur Nznyrxvgrf.

15:21 Ohg gur crbcyr gbbx bs gur fcbvy, furrc naq bkra, gur puvrs bs
gur guvatf juvpu fubhyq unir orra hggreyl qrfgeblrq, gb fnpevsvpr hagb
gur YBEQ gul Tbq va Tvytny.

15:22 Naq Fnzhry fnvq, Ungu gur YBEQ nf terng qryvtug va oheag
bssrevatf naq fnpevsvprf, nf va borlvat gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ? Orubyq,
gb borl vf orggre guna fnpevsvpr, naq gb urnexra guna gur sng bs enzf.

15:23 Sbe eroryyvba vf nf gur fva bs jvgpupensg, naq fghoobeaarff vf
nf vavdhvgl naq vqbyngel. Orpnhfr gubh unfg erwrpgrq gur jbeq bs gur
YBEQ, ur ungu nyfb erwrpgrq gurr sebz orvat xvat.

15:24 Naq Fnhy fnvq hagb Fnzhry, V unir fvaarq: sbe V unir
genafterffrq gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ, naq gul jbeqf: orpnhfr V
srnerq gur crbcyr, naq borlrq gurve ibvpr.

15:25 Abj gurersber, V cenl gurr, cneqba zl fva, naq ghea ntnva jvgu
zr, gung V znl jbefuvc gur YBEQ.

15:26 Naq Fnzhry fnvq hagb Fnhy, V jvyy abg erghea jvgu gurr: sbe gubh
unfg erwrpgrq gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ, naq gur YBEQ ungu erwrpgrq gurr
sebz orvat xvat bire Vfenry.

15:27 Naq nf Fnzhry ghearq nobhg gb tb njnl, ur ynvq ubyq hcba gur
fxveg bs uvf znagyr, naq vg erag.

15:28 Naq Fnzhry fnvq hagb uvz, Gur YBEQ ungu erag gur xvatqbz bs
Vfenry sebz gurr guvf qnl, naq ungu tvira vg gb n arvtuobhe bs guvar,
gung vf orggre guna gubh.

15:29 Naq nyfb gur Fgeratgu bs Vfenry jvyy abg yvr abe ercrag: sbe ur
vf abg n zna, gung ur fubhyq ercrag.

15:30 Gura ur fnvq, V unir fvaarq: lrg ubabhe zr abj, V cenl gurr,
orsber gur ryqref bs zl crbcyr, naq orsber Vfenry, naq ghea ntnva jvgu
zr, gung V znl jbefuvc gur YBEQ gul Tbq.

15:31 Fb Fnzhry ghearq ntnva nsgre Fnhy; naq Fnhy jbefuvccrq gur YBEQ.

15:32 Gura fnvq Fnzhry, Oevat lr uvgure gb zr Ntnt gur xvat bs gur
Nznyrxvgrf. Naq Ntnt pnzr hagb uvz qryvpngryl. Naq Ntnt fnvq, Fheryl
gur ovggrearff bs qrngu vf cnfg.

15:33 Naq Fnzhry fnvq, Nf gur fjbeq ungu znqr jbzra puvyqyrff, fb
funyy gul zbgure or puvyqyrff nzbat jbzra. Naq Fnzhry urjrq Ntnt va
cvrprf orsber gur YBEQ va Tvytny.

15:34 Gura Fnzhry jrag gb Enznu; naq Fnhy jrag hc gb uvf ubhfr gb
Tvornu bs Fnhy.

15:35 Naq Fnzhry pnzr ab zber gb frr Fnhy hagvy gur qnl bs uvf qrngu:
arireguryrff Fnzhry zbhearq sbe Fnhy: naq gur YBEQ ercragrq gung ur
unq znqr Fnhy xvat bire Vfenry.

16:1 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Fnzhry, Ubj ybat jvyg gubh zbhea sbe Fnhy,
frrvat V unir erwrpgrq uvz sebz ervtavat bire Vfenry? svyy guvar ubea
jvgu bvy, naq tb, V jvyy fraq gurr gb Wrffr gur Orguyrurzvgr: sbe V
unir cebivqrq zr n xvat nzbat uvf fbaf.

16:2 Naq Fnzhry fnvq, Ubj pna V tb? vs Fnhy urne vg, ur jvyy xvyy zr.
Naq gur YBEQ fnvq, Gnxr na urvsre jvgu gurr, naq fnl, V nz pbzr gb
fnpevsvpr gb gur YBEQ.

16:3 Naq pnyy Wrffr gb gur fnpevsvpr, naq V jvyy furj gurr jung gubh
funyg qb: naq gubh funyg nabvag hagb zr uvz jubz V anzr hagb gurr.

16:4 Naq Fnzhry qvq gung juvpu gur YBEQ fcnxr, naq pnzr gb Orguyrurz.
Naq gur ryqref bs gur gbja gerzoyrq ng uvf pbzvat, naq fnvq, Pbzrfg
gubh crnprnoyl?  16:5 Naq ur fnvq, Crnprnoyl: V nz pbzr gb fnpevsvpr
hagb gur YBEQ: fnapgvsl lbhefryirf, naq pbzr jvgu zr gb gur fnpevsvpr.
Naq ur fnapgvsvrq Wrffr naq uvf fbaf, naq pnyyrq gurz gb gur
fnpevsvpr.

16:6 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gurl jrer pbzr, gung ur ybbxrq ba
Ryvno, naq fnvq, Fheryl gur YBEQ'f nabvagrq vf orsber uvz.

16:7 Ohg gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Fnzhry, Ybbx abg ba uvf pbhagranapr, be ba
gur urvtug bs uvf fgngher; orpnhfr V unir ershfrq uvz: sbe gur YBEQ
frrgu abg nf zna frrgu; sbe zna ybbxrgu ba gur bhgjneq nccrnenapr, ohg
gur YBEQ ybbxrgu ba gur urneg.

16:8 Gura Wrffr pnyyrq Novanqno, naq znqr uvz cnff orsber Fnzhry. Naq
ur fnvq, Arvgure ungu gur YBEQ pubfra guvf.

16:9 Gura Wrffr znqr Funzznu gb cnff ol. Naq ur fnvq, Arvgure ungu gur
YBEQ pubfra guvf.

16:10 Ntnva, Wrffr znqr frira bs uvf fbaf gb cnff orsber Fnzhry. Naq
Fnzhry fnvq hagb Wrffr, Gur YBEQ ungu abg pubfra gurfr.

16:11 Naq Fnzhry fnvq hagb Wrffr, Ner urer nyy gul puvyqera? Naq ur
fnvq, Gurer erznvargu lrg gur lbhatrfg, naq, orubyq, ur xrrcrgu gur
furrc. Naq Fnzhry fnvq hagb Wrffr, Fraq naq srgpu uvz: sbe jr jvyy abg
fvg qbja gvyy ur pbzr uvgure.

16:12 Naq ur frag, naq oebhtug uvz va. Abj ur jnf ehqql, naq jvguny bs
n ornhgvshy pbhagranapr, naq tbbqyl gb ybbx gb. Naq gur YBEQ fnvq,
Nevfr, nabvag uvz: sbe guvf vf ur.

16:13 Gura Fnzhry gbbx gur ubea bs bvy, naq nabvagrq uvz va gur zvqfg
bs uvf oerguera: naq gur Fcvevg bs gur YBEQ pnzr hcba Qnivq sebz gung
qnl sbejneq. Fb Fnzhry ebfr hc, naq jrag gb Enznu.

16:14 Ohg gur Fcvevg bs gur YBEQ qrcnegrq sebz Fnhy, naq na rivy
fcvevg sebz gur YBEQ gebhoyrq uvz.

16:15 Naq Fnhy'f freinagf fnvq hagb uvz, Orubyq abj, na rivy fcvevg
sebz Tbq gebhoyrgu gurr.

16:16 Yrg bhe ybeq abj pbzznaq gul freinagf, juvpu ner orsber gurr, gb
frrx bhg n zna, jub vf n phaavat cynlre ba na unec: naq vg funyy pbzr
gb cnff, jura gur rivy fcvevg sebz Tbq vf hcba gurr, gung ur funyy
cynl jvgu uvf unaq, naq gubh funyg or jryy.

16:17 Naq Fnhy fnvq hagb uvf freinagf, Cebivqr zr abj n zna gung pna
cynl jryy, naq oevat uvz gb zr.

16:18 Gura nafjrerq bar bs gur freinagf, naq fnvq, Orubyq, V unir frra
n fba bs Wrffr gur Orguyrurzvgr, gung vf phaavat va cynlvat, naq n
zvtugl inyvnag zna, naq n zna bs jne, naq cehqrag va znggref, naq n
pbzryl crefba, naq gur YBEQ vf jvgu uvz.

16:19 Jurersber Fnhy frag zrffratref hagb Wrffr, naq fnvq, Fraq zr
Qnivq gul fba, juvpu vf jvgu gur furrc.

16:20 Naq Wrffr gbbx na nff ynqra jvgu oernq, naq n obggyr bs jvar,
naq n xvq, naq frag gurz ol Qnivq uvf fba hagb Fnhy.

16:21 Naq Qnivq pnzr gb Fnhy, naq fgbbq orsber uvz: naq ur ybirq uvz
terngyl; naq ur orpnzr uvf nezbheornere.

16:22 Naq Fnhy frag gb Wrffr, fnlvat, Yrg Qnivq, V cenl gurr, fgnaq
orsber zr; sbe ur ungu sbhaq snibhe va zl fvtug.

16:23 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur rivy fcvevg sebz Tbq jnf hcba
Fnhy, gung Qnivq gbbx na unec, naq cynlrq jvgu uvf unaq: fb Fnhy jnf
erserfurq, naq jnf jryy, naq gur rivy fcvevg qrcnegrq sebz uvz.

17:1 Abj gur Cuvyvfgvarf tngurerq gbtrgure gurve nezvrf gb onggyr, naq
jrer tngurerq gbtrgure ng Fubpubu, juvpu orybatrgu gb Whqnu, naq
cvgpurq orgjrra Fubpubu naq Nmrxnu, va Rcurfqnzzvz.

17:2 Naq Fnhy naq gur zra bs Vfenry jrer tngurerq gbtrgure, naq
cvgpurq ol gur inyyrl bs Rynu, naq frg gur onggyr va neenl ntnvafg gur
Cuvyvfgvarf.

17:3 Naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf fgbbq ba n zbhagnva ba gur bar fvqr, naq
Vfenry fgbbq ba n zbhagnva ba gur bgure fvqr: naq gurer jnf n inyyrl
orgjrra gurz.

17:4 Naq gurer jrag bhg n punzcvba bhg bs gur pnzc bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf,
anzrq Tbyvngu, bs Tngu, jubfr urvtug jnf fvk phovgf naq n fcna.

17:5 Naq ur unq na uryzrg bs oenff hcba uvf urnq, naq ur jnf nezrq
jvgu n pbng bs znvy; naq gur jrvtug bs gur pbng jnf svir gubhfnaq
furxryf bs oenff.

17:6 Naq ur unq ternirf bs oenff hcba uvf yrtf, naq n gnetrg bs oenff
orgjrra uvf fubhyqref.

17:7 Naq gur fgnss bs uvf fcrne jnf yvxr n jrnire'f ornz; naq uvf
fcrne'f urnq jrvturq fvk uhaqerq furxryf bs veba: naq bar ornevat n
fuvryq jrag orsber uvz.

17:8 Naq ur fgbbq naq pevrq hagb gur nezvrf bs Vfenry, naq fnvq hagb
gurz, Jul ner lr pbzr bhg gb frg lbhe onggyr va neenl? nz abg V n
Cuvyvfgvar, naq lr freinagf gb Fnhy? pubbfr lbh n zna sbe lbh, naq yrg
uvz pbzr qbja gb zr.

17:9 Vs ur or noyr gb svtug jvgu zr, naq gb xvyy zr, gura jvyy jr or
lbhe freinagf: ohg vs V cerinvy ntnvafg uvz, naq xvyy uvz, gura funyy
lr or bhe freinagf, naq freir hf.

17:10 Naq gur Cuvyvfgvar fnvq, V qrsl gur nezvrf bs Vfenry guvf qnl;
tvir zr n zna, gung jr znl svtug gbtrgure.

17:11 Jura Fnhy naq nyy Vfenry urneq gubfr jbeqf bs gur Cuvyvfgvar,
gurl jrer qvfznlrq, naq terngyl nsenvq.

17:12 Abj Qnivq jnf gur fba bs gung Rcuenguvgr bs Orguyrurzwhqnu,
jubfr anzr jnf Wrffr; naq ur unq rvtug fbaf: naq gur zna jrag nzbat
zra sbe na byq zna va gur qnlf bs Fnhy.

17:13 Naq gur guerr ryqrfg fbaf bs Wrffr jrag naq sbyybjrq Fnhy gb gur
onggyr: naq gur anzrf bs uvf guerr fbaf gung jrag gb gur onggyr jrer
Ryvno gur svefgobea, naq arkg hagb uvz Novanqno, naq gur guveq
Funzznu.

17:14 Naq Qnivq jnf gur lbhatrfg: naq gur guerr ryqrfg sbyybjrq Fnhy.

17:15 Ohg Qnivq jrag naq erghearq sebz Fnhy gb srrq uvf sngure'f furrc
ng Orguyrurz.

17:16 Naq gur Cuvyvfgvar qerj arne zbeavat naq riravat, naq cerfragrq
uvzfrys sbegl qnlf.

17:17 Naq Wrffr fnvq hagb Qnivq uvf fba, Gnxr abj sbe gul oerguera na
rcunu bs guvf cnepurq pbea, naq gurfr gra ybnirf, naq eha gb gur pnzc
bs gul oerguera; 17:18 Naq pneel gurfr gra purrfrf hagb gur pncgnva bs
gurve gubhfnaq, naq ybbx ubj gul oerguera sner, naq gnxr gurve cyrqtr.

17:19 Abj Fnhy, naq gurl, naq nyy gur zra bs Vfenry, jrer va gur
inyyrl bs Rynu, svtugvat jvgu gur Cuvyvfgvarf.

17:20 Naq Qnivq ebfr hc rneyl va gur zbeavat, naq yrsg gur furrc jvgu
n xrrcre, naq gbbx, naq jrag, nf Wrffr unq pbzznaqrq uvz; naq ur pnzr
gb gur gerapu, nf gur ubfg jnf tbvat sbegu gb gur svtug, naq fubhgrq
sbe gur onggyr.

17:21 Sbe Vfenry naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf unq chg gur onggyr va neenl, nezl
ntnvafg nezl.

17:22 Naq Qnivq yrsg uvf pneevntr va gur unaq bs gur xrrcre bs gur
pneevntr, naq ena vagb gur nezl, naq pnzr naq fnyhgrq uvf oerguera.

17:23 Naq nf ur gnyxrq jvgu gurz, orubyq, gurer pnzr hc gur punzcvba,
gur Cuvyvfgvar bs Tngu, Tbyvngu ol anzr, bhg bs gur nezvrf bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf, naq fcnxr nppbeqvat gb gur fnzr jbeqf: naq Qnivq urneq
gurz.

17:24 Naq nyy gur zra bs Vfenry, jura gurl fnj gur zna, syrq sebz uvz,
naq jrer fber nsenvq.

17:25 Naq gur zra bs Vfenry fnvq, Unir lr frra guvf zna gung vf pbzr
hc?  fheryl gb qrsl Vfenry vf ur pbzr hc: naq vg funyy or, gung gur
zna jub xvyyrgu uvz, gur xvat jvyy raevpu uvz jvgu terng evpurf, naq
jvyy tvir uvz uvf qnhtugre, naq znxr uvf sngure'f ubhfr serr va
Vfenry.

17:26 Naq Qnivq fcnxr gb gur zra gung fgbbq ol uvz, fnlvat, Jung funyy
or qbar gb gur zna gung xvyyrgu guvf Cuvyvfgvar, naq gnxrgu njnl gur
ercebnpu sebz Vfenry? sbe jub vf guvf hapvephzpvfrq Cuvyvfgvar, gung
ur fubhyq qrsl gur nezvrf bs gur yvivat Tbq?  17:27 Naq gur crbcyr
nafjrerq uvz nsgre guvf znaare, fnlvat, Fb funyy vg or qbar gb gur zna
gung xvyyrgu uvz.

17:28 Naq Ryvno uvf ryqrfg oebgure urneq jura ur fcnxr hagb gur zra;
naq Ryvno'f natre jnf xvaqyrq ntnvafg Qnivq, naq ur fnvq, Jul pnzrfg
gubh qbja uvgure? naq jvgu jubz unfg gubh yrsg gubfr srj furrc va gur
jvyqrearff? V xabj gul cevqr, naq gur anhtugvarff bs guvar urneg; sbe
gubh neg pbzr qbja gung gubh zvtugrfg frr gur onggyr.

17:29 Naq Qnivq fnvq, Jung unir V abj qbar? Vf gurer abg n pnhfr?
17:30 Naq ur ghearq sebz uvz gbjneq nabgure, naq fcnxr nsgre gur fnzr
znaare: naq gur crbcyr nafjrerq uvz ntnva nsgre gur sbezre znaare.

17:31 Naq jura gur jbeqf jrer urneq juvpu Qnivq fcnxr, gurl erurnefrq
gurz orsber Fnhy: naq ur frag sbe uvz.

17:32 Naq Qnivq fnvq gb Fnhy, Yrg ab zna'f urneg snvy orpnhfr bs uvz;
gul freinag jvyy tb naq svtug jvgu guvf Cuvyvfgvar.

17:33 Naq Fnhy fnvq gb Qnivq, Gubh neg abg noyr gb tb ntnvafg guvf
Cuvyvfgvar gb svtug jvgu uvz: sbe gubh neg ohg n lbhgu, naq ur n zna
bs jne sebz uvf lbhgu.

17:34 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb Fnhy, Gul freinag xrcg uvf sngure'f furrc,
naq gurer pnzr n yvba, naq n orne, naq gbbx n ynzo bhg bs gur sybpx:
17:35 Naq V jrag bhg nsgre uvz, naq fzbgr uvz, naq qryvirerq vg bhg bs
uvf zbhgu: naq jura ur nebfr ntnvafg zr, V pnhtug uvz ol uvf orneq,
naq fzbgr uvz, naq fyrj uvz.

17:36 Gul freinag fyrj obgu gur yvba naq gur orne: naq guvf
hapvephzpvfrq Cuvyvfgvar funyy or nf bar bs gurz, frrvat ur ungu
qrsvrq gur nezvrf bs gur yvivat Tbq.

17:37 Qnivq fnvq zberbire, Gur YBEQ gung qryvirerq zr bhg bs gur cnj
bs gur yvba, naq bhg bs gur cnj bs gur orne, ur jvyy qryvire zr bhg bs
gur unaq bs guvf Cuvyvfgvar. Naq Fnhy fnvq hagb Qnivq, Tb, naq gur
YBEQ or jvgu gurr.

17:38 Naq Fnhy nezrq Qnivq jvgu uvf nezbhe, naq ur chg na uryzrg bs
oenff hcba uvf urnq; nyfb ur nezrq uvz jvgu n pbng bs znvy.

17:39 Naq Qnivq tveqrq uvf fjbeq hcba uvf nezbhe, naq ur nffnlrq gb
tb; sbe ur unq abg cebirq vg. Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb Fnhy, V pnaabg tb
jvgu gurfr; sbe V unir abg cebirq gurz. Naq Qnivq chg gurz bss uvz.

17:40 Naq ur gbbx uvf fgnss va uvf unaq, naq pubfr uvz svir fzbbgu
fgbarf bhg bs gur oebbx, naq chg gurz va n furcureq'f ont juvpu ur
unq, rira va n fpevc; naq uvf fyvat jnf va uvf unaq: naq ur qerj arne
gb gur Cuvyvfgvar.

17:41 Naq gur Cuvyvfgvar pnzr ba naq qerj arne hagb Qnivq; naq gur zna
gung oner gur fuvryq jrag orsber uvz.

17:42 Naq jura gur Cuvyvfgvar ybbxrq nobhg, naq fnj Qnivq, ur
qvfqnvarq uvz: sbe ur jnf ohg n lbhgu, naq ehqql, naq bs n snve
pbhagranapr.

17:43 Naq gur Cuvyvfgvar fnvq hagb Qnivq, Nz V n qbt, gung gubh pbzrfg
gb zr jvgu fgnirf? Naq gur Cuvyvfgvar phefrq Qnivq ol uvf tbqf.

17:44 Naq gur Cuvyvfgvar fnvq gb Qnivq, Pbzr gb zr, naq V jvyy tvir
gul syrfu hagb gur sbjyf bs gur nve, naq gb gur ornfgf bs gur svryq.

17:45 Gura fnvq Qnivq gb gur Cuvyvfgvar, Gubh pbzrfg gb zr jvgu n
fjbeq, naq jvgu n fcrne, naq jvgu n fuvryq: ohg V pbzr gb gurr va gur
anzr bs gur YBEQ bs ubfgf, gur Tbq bs gur nezvrf bs Vfenry, jubz gubh
unfg qrsvrq.

17:46 Guvf qnl jvyy gur YBEQ qryvire gurr vagb zvar unaq; naq V jvyy
fzvgr gurr, naq gnxr guvar urnq sebz gurr; naq V jvyy tvir gur
pnepnfrf bs gur ubfg bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf guvf qnl hagb gur sbjyf bs gur
nve, naq gb gur jvyq ornfgf bs gur rnegu; gung nyy gur rnegu znl xabj
gung gurer vf n Tbq va Vfenry.

17:47 Naq nyy guvf nffrzoyl funyy xabj gung gur YBEQ fnirgu abg jvgu
fjbeq naq fcrne: sbe gur onggyr vf gur YBEQ'f, naq ur jvyy tvir lbh
vagb bhe unaqf.

17:48 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur Cuvyvfgvar nebfr, naq pnzr, naq
qerj avtu gb zrrg Qnivq, gung Qnivq unfgrarq, naq ena gbjneq gur nezl
gb zrrg gur Cuvyvfgvar.

17:49 Naq Qnivq chg uvf unaq va uvf ont, naq gbbx gurapr n fgbar, naq
fynat vg, naq fzbgr gur Cuvyvfgvar va uvf sberurnq, gung gur fgbar
fhax vagb uvf sberurnq; naq ur sryy hcba uvf snpr gb gur rnegu.

17:50 Fb Qnivq cerinvyrq bire gur Cuvyvfgvar jvgu n fyvat naq jvgu n
fgbar, naq fzbgr gur Cuvyvfgvar, naq fyrj uvz; ohg gurer jnf ab fjbeq
va gur unaq bs Qnivq.

17:51 Gurersber Qnivq ena, naq fgbbq hcba gur Cuvyvfgvar, naq gbbx uvf
fjbeq, naq qerj vg bhg bs gur furngu gurerbs, naq fyrj uvz, naq phg
bss uvf urnq gurerjvgu. Naq jura gur Cuvyvfgvarf fnj gurve punzcvba
jnf qrnq, gurl syrq.

17:52 Naq gur zra bs Vfenry naq bs Whqnu nebfr, naq fubhgrq, naq
chefhrq gur Cuvyvfgvarf, hagvy gubh pbzr gb gur inyyrl, naq gb gur
tngrf bs Rxeba.

Naq gur jbhaqrq bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf sryy qbja ol gur jnl gb Funnenvz,
rira hagb Tngu, naq hagb Rxeba.

17:53 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry erghearq sebz punfvat nsgre gur
Cuvyvfgvarf, naq gurl fcbvyrq gurve gragf.

17:54 Naq Qnivq gbbx gur urnq bs gur Cuvyvfgvar, naq oebhtug vg gb
Wrehfnyrz; ohg ur chg uvf nezbhe va uvf grag.

17:55 Naq jura Fnhy fnj Qnivq tb sbegu ntnvafg gur Cuvyvfgvar, ur fnvq
hagb Noare, gur pncgnva bs gur ubfg, Noare, jubfr fba vf guvf lbhgu?
Naq Noare fnvq, Nf gul fbhy yvirgu, B xvat, V pnaabg gryy.

17:56 Naq gur xvat fnvq, Radhver gubh jubfr fba gur fgevcyvat vf.

17:57 Naq nf Qnivq erghearq sebz gur fynhtugre bs gur Cuvyvfgvar,
Noare gbbx uvz, naq oebhtug uvz orsber Fnhy jvgu gur urnq bs gur
Cuvyvfgvar va uvf unaq.

17:58 Naq Fnhy fnvq gb uvz, Jubfr fba neg gubh, gubh lbhat zna? Naq
Qnivq nafjrerq, V nz gur fba bs gul freinag Wrffr gur Orguyrurzvgr.

18:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura ur unq znqr na raq bs fcrnxvat hagb
Fnhy, gung gur fbhy bs Wbanguna jnf xavg jvgu gur fbhy bs Qnivq, naq
Wbanguna ybirq uvz nf uvf bja fbhy.

18:2 Naq Fnhy gbbx uvz gung qnl, naq jbhyq yrg uvz tb ab zber ubzr gb
uvf sngure'f ubhfr.

18:3 Gura Wbanguna naq Qnivq znqr n pbiranag, orpnhfr ur ybirq uvz nf
uvf bja fbhy.

18:4 Naq Wbanguna fgevccrq uvzfrys bs gur ebor gung jnf hcba uvz, naq
tnir vg gb Qnivq, naq uvf tnezragf, rira gb uvf fjbeq, naq gb uvf obj,
naq gb uvf tveqyr.

18:5 Naq Qnivq jrag bhg juvgurefbrire Fnhy frag uvz, naq orunirq
uvzfrys jvfryl: naq Fnhy frg uvz bire gur zra bs jne, naq ur jnf
npprcgrq va gur fvtug bs nyy gur crbcyr, naq nyfb va gur fvtug bs
Fnhy'f freinagf.

18:6 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nf gurl pnzr, jura Qnivq jnf erghearq sebz
gur fynhtugre bs gur Cuvyvfgvar, gung gur jbzra pnzr bhg bs nyy pvgvrf
bs Vfenry, fvatvat naq qnapvat, gb zrrg xvat Fnhy, jvgu gnoergf, jvgu
wbl, naq jvgu vafgehzragf bs zhfvpx.

18:7 Naq gur jbzra nafjrerq bar nabgure nf gurl cynlrq, naq fnvq, Fnhy
ungu fynva uvf gubhfnaqf, naq Qnivq uvf gra gubhfnaqf.

18:8 Naq Fnhy jnf irel jebgu, naq gur fnlvat qvfcyrnfrq uvz; naq ur
fnvq, Gurl unir nfpevorq hagb Qnivq gra gubhfnaqf, naq gb zr gurl unir
nfpevorq ohg gubhfnaqf: naq jung pna ur unir zber ohg gur xvatqbz?
18:9 Naq Fnhy rlrq Qnivq sebz gung qnl naq sbejneq.

18:10 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ba gur zbeebj, gung gur rivy fcvevg sebz Tbq
pnzr hcba Fnhy, naq ur cebcurfvrq va gur zvqfg bs gur ubhfr: naq Qnivq
cynlrq jvgu uvf unaq, nf ng bgure gvzrf: naq gurer jnf n wniryva va
Fnhy'f unaq.

18:11 Naq Fnhy pnfg gur wniryva; sbe ur fnvq, V jvyy fzvgr Qnivq rira
gb gur jnyy jvgu vg. Naq Qnivq nibvqrq bhg bs uvf cerfrapr gjvpr.

18:12 Naq Fnhy jnf nsenvq bs Qnivq, orpnhfr gur YBEQ jnf jvgu uvz, naq
jnf qrcnegrq sebz Fnhy.

18:13 Gurersber Fnhy erzbirq uvz sebz uvz, naq znqr uvz uvf pncgnva
bire n gubhfnaq; naq ur jrag bhg naq pnzr va orsber gur crbcyr.

18:14 Naq Qnivq orunirq uvzfrys jvfryl va nyy uvf jnlf; naq gur YBEQ
jnf jvgu uvz.

18:15 Jurersber jura Fnhy fnj gung ur orunirq uvzfrys irel jvfryl, ur
jnf nsenvq bs uvz.

18:16 Ohg nyy Vfenry naq Whqnu ybirq Qnivq, orpnhfr ur jrag bhg naq
pnzr va orsber gurz.

18:17 Naq Fnhy fnvq gb Qnivq, Orubyq zl ryqre qnhtugre Zreno, ure jvyy
V tvir gurr gb jvsr: bayl or gubh inyvnag sbe zr, naq svtug gur YBEQ'f
onggyrf.

Sbe Fnhy fnvq, Yrg abg zvar unaq or hcba uvz, ohg yrg gur unaq bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf or hcba uvz.

18:18 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb Fnhy, Jub nz V? naq jung vf zl yvsr, be zl
sngure'f snzvyl va Vfenry, gung V fubhyq or fba va ynj gb gur xvat?
18:19 Ohg vg pnzr gb cnff ng gur gvzr jura Zreno Fnhy'f qnhtugre
fubhyq unir orra tvira gb Qnivq, gung fur jnf tvira hagb Nqevry gur
Zrubynguvgr gb jvsr.

18:20 Naq Zvpuny Fnhy'f qnhtugre ybirq Qnivq: naq gurl gbyq Fnhy, naq
gur guvat cyrnfrq uvz.

18:21 Naq Fnhy fnvq, V jvyy tvir uvz ure, gung fur znl or n faner gb
uvz, naq gung gur unaq bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf znl or ntnvafg uvz.
Jurersber Fnhy fnvq gb Qnivq, Gubh funyg guvf qnl or zl fba va ynj va
gur bar bs gur gjnva.

18:22 Naq Fnhy pbzznaqrq uvf freinagf, fnlvat, Pbzzhar jvgu Qnivq
frpergyl, naq fnl, Orubyq, gur xvat ungu qryvtug va gurr, naq nyy uvf
freinagf ybir gurr: abj gurersber or gur xvat'f fba va ynj.

18:23 Naq Fnhy'f freinagf fcnxr gubfr jbeqf va gur rnef bs Qnivq. Naq
Qnivq fnvq, Frrzrgu vg gb lbh n yvtug guvat gb or n xvat'f fba va ynj,
frrvat gung V nz n cbbe zna, naq yvtugyl rfgrrzrq?  18:24 Naq gur
freinagf bs Fnhy gbyq uvz, fnlvat, Ba guvf znaare fcnxr Qnivq.

18:25 Naq Fnhy fnvq, Guhf funyy lr fnl gb Qnivq, Gur xvat qrfvergu abg
nal qbjel, ohg na uhaqerq sberfxvaf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf, gb or niratrq
bs gur xvat'f rarzvrf. Ohg Fnhy gubhtug gb znxr Qnivq snyy ol gur unaq
bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf.

18:26 Naq jura uvf freinagf gbyq Qnivq gurfr jbeqf, vg cyrnfrq Qnivq
jryy gb or gur xvat'f fba va ynj: naq gur qnlf jrer abg rkcverq.

18:27 Jurersber Qnivq nebfr naq jrag, ur naq uvf zra, naq fyrj bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf gjb uhaqerq zra; naq Qnivq oebhtug gurve sberfxvaf, naq
gurl tnir gurz va shyy gnyr gb gur xvat, gung ur zvtug or gur xvat'f
fba va ynj. Naq Fnhy tnir uvz Zvpuny uvf qnhtugre gb jvsr.

18:28 Naq Fnhy fnj naq xarj gung gur YBEQ jnf jvgu Qnivq, naq gung
Zvpuny Fnhy'f qnhtugre ybirq uvz.

18:29 Naq Fnhy jnf lrg gur zber nsenvq bs Qnivq; naq Fnhy orpnzr
Qnivq'f rarzl pbagvahnyyl.

18:30 Gura gur cevaprf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf jrag sbegu: naq vg pnzr gb
cnff, nsgre gurl jrag sbegu, gung Qnivq orunirq uvzfrys zber jvfryl
guna nyy gur freinagf bs Fnhy; fb gung uvf anzr jnf zhpu frg ol.

19:1 Naq Fnhy fcnxr gb Wbanguna uvf fba, naq gb nyy uvf freinagf, gung
gurl fubhyq xvyy Qnivq.

19:2 Ohg Wbanguna Fnhy'f fba qryvtugrq zhpu va Qnivq: naq Wbanguna
gbyq Qnivq, fnlvat, Fnhy zl sngure frrxrgu gb xvyy gurr: abj
gurersber, V cenl gurr, gnxr urrq gb gulfrys hagvy gur zbeavat, naq
novqr va n frperg cynpr, naq uvqr gulfrys: 19:3 Naq V jvyy tb bhg naq
fgnaq orfvqr zl sngure va gur svryq jurer gubh neg, naq V jvyy pbzzhar
jvgu zl sngure bs gurr; naq jung V frr, gung V jvyy gryy gurr.

19:4 Naq Wbanguna fcnxr tbbq bs Qnivq hagb Fnhy uvf sngure, naq fnvq
hagb uvz, Yrg abg gur xvat fva ntnvafg uvf freinag, ntnvafg Qnivq;
orpnhfr ur ungu abg fvaarq ntnvafg gurr, naq orpnhfr uvf jbexf unir
orra gb gurr-jneq irel tbbq: 19:5 Sbe ur qvq chg uvf yvsr va uvf unaq,
naq fyrj gur Cuvyvfgvar, naq gur YBEQ jebhtug n terng fnyingvba sbe
nyy Vfenry: gubh fnjrfg vg, naq qvqfg erwbvpr: jurersber gura jvyg
gubh fva ntnvafg vaabprag oybbq, gb fynl Qnivq jvgubhg n pnhfr?  19:6
Naq Fnhy urnexrarq hagb gur ibvpr bs Wbanguna: naq Fnhy fjner, Nf gur
YBEQ yvirgu, ur funyy abg or fynva.

19:7 Naq Wbanguna pnyyrq Qnivq, naq Wbanguna furjrq uvz nyy gubfr
guvatf.

Naq Wbanguna oebhtug Qnivq gb Fnhy, naq ur jnf va uvf cerfrapr, nf va
gvzrf cnfg.

19:8 Naq gurer jnf jne ntnva: naq Qnivq jrag bhg, naq sbhtug jvgu gur
Cuvyvfgvarf, naq fyrj gurz jvgu n terng fynhtugre; naq gurl syrq sebz
uvz.

19:9 Naq gur rivy fcvevg sebz gur YBEQ jnf hcba Fnhy, nf ur fng va uvf
ubhfr jvgu uvf wniryva va uvf unaq: naq Qnivq cynlrq jvgu uvf unaq.

19:10 Naq Fnhy fbhtug gb fzvgr Qnivq rira gb gur jnyy jvgu gur
wniryva: ohg ur fyvccrq njnl bhg bs Fnhy'f cerfrapr, naq ur fzbgr gur
wniryva vagb gur jnyy: naq Qnivq syrq, naq rfpncrq gung avtug.

19:11 Fnhy nyfb frag zrffratref hagb Qnivq'f ubhfr, gb jngpu uvz, naq
gb fynl uvz va gur zbeavat: naq Zvpuny Qnivq'f jvsr gbyq uvz, fnlvat,
Vs gubh fnir abg gul yvsr gb avtug, gb zbeebj gubh funyg or fynva.

19:12 Fb Zvpuny yrg Qnivq qbja guebhtu n jvaqbj: naq ur jrag, naq
syrq, naq rfpncrq.

19:13 Naq Zvpuny gbbx na vzntr, naq ynvq vg va gur orq, naq chg n
cvyybj bs tbngf' unve sbe uvf obyfgre, naq pbirerq vg jvgu n pybgu.

19:14 Naq jura Fnhy frag zrffratref gb gnxr Qnivq, fur fnvq, Ur vf
fvpx.

19:15 Naq Fnhy frag gur zrffratref ntnva gb frr Qnivq, fnlvat, Oevat
uvz hc gb zr va gur orq, gung V znl fynl uvz.

19:16 Naq jura gur zrffratref jrer pbzr va, orubyq, gurer jnf na vzntr
va gur orq, jvgu n cvyybj bs tbngf' unve sbe uvf obyfgre.

19:17 Naq Fnhy fnvq hagb Zvpuny, Jul unfg gubh qrprvirq zr fb, naq
frag njnl zvar rarzl, gung ur vf rfpncrq? Naq Zvpuny nafjrerq Fnhy, Ur
fnvq hagb zr, Yrg zr tb; jul fubhyq V xvyy gurr?  19:18 Fb Qnivq syrq,
naq rfpncrq, naq pnzr gb Fnzhry gb Enznu, naq gbyq uvz nyy gung Fnhy
unq qbar gb uvz. Naq ur naq Fnzhry jrag naq qjryg va Anvbgu.

19:19 Naq vg jnf gbyq Fnhy, fnlvat, Orubyq, Qnivq vf ng Anvbgu va
Enznu.

19:20 Naq Fnhy frag zrffratref gb gnxr Qnivq: naq jura gurl fnj gur
pbzcnal bs gur cebcurgf cebcurflvat, naq Fnzhry fgnaqvat nf nccbvagrq
bire gurz, gur Fcvevg bs Tbq jnf hcba gur zrffratref bs Fnhy, naq gurl
nyfb cebcurfvrq.

19:21 Naq jura vg jnf gbyq Fnhy, ur frag bgure zrffratref, naq gurl
cebcurfvrq yvxrjvfr. Naq Fnhy frag zrffratref ntnva gur guveq gvzr,
naq gurl cebcurfvrq nyfb.

19:22 Gura jrag ur nyfb gb Enznu, naq pnzr gb n terng jryy gung vf va
Frpuh: naq ur nfxrq naq fnvq, Jurer ner Fnzhry naq Qnivq? Naq bar
fnvq, Orubyq, gurl or ng Anvbgu va Enznu.

19:23 Naq ur jrag guvgure gb Anvbgu va Enznu: naq gur Fcvevg bs Tbq
jnf hcba uvz nyfb, naq ur jrag ba, naq cebcurfvrq, hagvy ur pnzr gb
Anvbgu va Enznu.

19:24 Naq ur fgevccrq bss uvf pybgurf nyfb, naq cebcurfvrq orsber
Fnzhry va yvxr znaare, naq ynl qbja anxrq nyy gung qnl naq nyy gung
avtug. Jurersber gurl fnl, Vf Fnhy nyfb nzbat gur cebcurgf?  20:1 Naq
Qnivq syrq sebz Anvbgu va Enznu, naq pnzr naq fnvq orsber Wbanguna,
Jung unir V qbar? jung vf zvar vavdhvgl? naq jung vf zl fva orsber gul
sngure, gung ur frrxrgu zl yvsr?  20:2 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Tbq
sbeovq; gubh funyg abg qvr: orubyq, zl sngure jvyy qb abguvat rvgure
terng be fznyy, ohg gung ur jvyy furj vg zr: naq jul fubhyq zl sngure
uvqr guvf guvat sebz zr? vg vf abg fb.

20:3 Naq Qnivq fjner zberbire, naq fnvq, Gul sngure pregnvayl xabjrgu
gung V unir sbhaq tenpr va guvar rlrf; naq ur fnvgu, Yrg abg Wbanguna
xabj guvf, yrfg ur or tevrirq: ohg gehyl nf gur YBEQ yvirgu, naq nf
gul fbhy yvirgu, gurer vf ohg n fgrc orgjrra zr naq qrngu.

20:4 Gura fnvq Wbanguna hagb Qnivq, Jungfbrire gul fbhy qrfvergu, V
jvyy rira qb vg sbe gurr.

20:5 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb Wbanguna, Orubyq, gb zbeebj vf gur arj zbba,
naq V fubhyq abg snvy gb fvg jvgu gur xvat ng zrng: ohg yrg zr tb,
gung V znl uvqr zlfrys va gur svryq hagb gur guveq qnl ng rira.

20:6 Vs gul sngure ng nyy zvff zr, gura fnl, Qnivq rnearfgyl nfxrq
yrnir bs zr gung ur zvtug eha gb Orguyrurz uvf pvgl: sbe gurer vf n
lrneyl fnpevsvpr gurer sbe nyy gur snzvyl.

20:7 Vs ur fnl guhf, Vg vf jryy; gul freinag funyy unir crnpr: ohg vs
ur or irel jebgu, gura or fher gung rivy vf qrgrezvarq ol uvz.

20:8 Gurersber gubh funyg qrny xvaqyl jvgu gul freinag; sbe gubh unfg
oebhtug gul freinag vagb n pbiranag bs gur YBEQ jvgu gurr:
abgjvgufgnaqvat, vs gurer or va zr vavdhvgl, fynl zr gulfrys; sbe jul
fubhyqrfg gubh oevat zr gb gul sngure?  20:9 Naq Wbanguna fnvq, Sne or
vg sebz gurr: sbe vs V xarj pregnvayl gung rivy jrer qrgrezvarq ol zl
sngure gb pbzr hcba gurr, gura jbhyq abg V gryy vg gurr?  20:10 Gura
fnvq Qnivq gb Wbanguna, Jub funyy gryy zr? be jung vs gul sngure
nafjre gurr ebhtuyl?  20:11 Naq Wbanguna fnvq hagb Qnivq, Pbzr, naq
yrg hf tb bhg vagb gur svryq. Naq gurl jrag bhg obgu bs gurz vagb gur
svryq.

20:12 Naq Wbanguna fnvq hagb Qnivq, B YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, jura V unir
fbhaqrq zl sngure nobhg gb zbeebj nal gvzr, be gur guveq qnl, naq,
orubyq, vs gurer or tbbq gbjneq Qnivq, naq V gura fraq abg hagb gurr,
naq furj vg gurr; 20:13 Gur YBEQ qb fb naq zhpu zber gb Wbanguna: ohg
vs vg cyrnfr zl sngure gb qb gurr rivy, gura V jvyy furj vg gurr, naq
fraq gurr njnl, gung gubh znlrfg tb va crnpr: naq gur YBEQ or jvgu
gurr, nf ur ungu orra jvgu zl sngure.

20:14 Naq gubh funyg abg bayl juvyr lrg V yvir furj zr gur xvaqarff bs
gur YBEQ, gung V qvr abg: 20:15 Ohg nyfb gubh funyg abg phg bss gul
xvaqarff sebz zl ubhfr sbe rire: ab, abg jura gur YBEQ ungu phg bss
gur rarzvrf bs Qnivq rirel bar sebz gur snpr bs gur rnegu.

20:16 Fb Wbanguna znqr n pbiranag jvgu gur ubhfr bs Qnivq, fnlvat, Yrg
gur YBEQ rira erdhver vg ng gur unaq bs Qnivq'f rarzvrf.

20:17 Naq Wbanguna pnhfrq Qnivq gb fjrne ntnva, orpnhfr ur ybirq uvz:
sbe ur ybirq uvz nf ur ybirq uvf bja fbhy.

20:18 Gura Wbanguna fnvq gb Qnivq, Gb zbeebj vf gur arj zbba: naq gubh
funyg or zvffrq, orpnhfr gul frng jvyy or rzcgl.

20:19 Naq jura gubh unfg fgnlrq guerr qnlf, gura gubh funyg tb qbja
dhvpxyl, naq pbzr gb gur cynpr jurer gubh qvqfg uvqr gulfrys jura gur
ohfvarff jnf va unaq, naq funyg erznva ol gur fgbar Rmry.

20:20 Naq V jvyy fubbg guerr neebjf ba gur fvqr gurerbs, nf gubhtu V
fubg ng n znex.

20:21 Naq, orubyq, V jvyy fraq n ynq, fnlvat, Tb, svaq bhg gur neebjf.
Vs V rkcerffyl fnl hagb gur ynq, Orubyq, gur neebjf ner ba guvf fvqr
bs gurr, gnxr gurz; gura pbzr gubh: sbe gurer vf crnpr gb gurr, naq ab
uheg; nf gur YBEQ yvirgu.

20:22 Ohg vs V fnl guhf hagb gur lbhat zna, Orubyq, gur neebjf ner
orlbaq gurr; tb gul jnl: sbe gur YBEQ ungu frag gurr njnl.

20:23 Naq nf gbhpuvat gur znggre juvpu gubh naq V unir fcbxra bs,
orubyq, gur YBEQ or orgjrra gurr naq zr sbe rire.

20:24 Fb Qnivq uvq uvzfrys va gur svryq: naq jura gur arj zbba jnf
pbzr, gur xvat fng uvz qbja gb rng zrng.

20:25 Naq gur xvat fng hcba uvf frng, nf ng bgure gvzrf, rira hcba n
frng ol gur jnyy: naq Wbanguna nebfr, naq Noare fng ol Fnhy'f fvqr,
naq Qnivq'f cynpr jnf rzcgl.

20:26 Arireguryrff Fnhy fcnxr abg nal guvat gung qnl: sbe ur gubhtug,
Fbzrguvat ungu orsnyyra uvz, ur vf abg pyrna; fheryl ur vf abg pyrna.

20:27 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ba gur zbeebj, juvpu jnf gur frpbaq qnl bs
gur zbagu, gung Qnivq'f cynpr jnf rzcgl: naq Fnhy fnvq hagb Wbanguna
uvf fba, Jurersber pbzrgu abg gur fba bs Wrffr gb zrng, arvgure
lrfgreqnl, abe gb qnl?  20:28 Naq Wbanguna nafjrerq Fnhy, Qnivq
rnearfgyl nfxrq yrnir bs zr gb tb gb Orguyrurz: 20:29 Naq ur fnvq, Yrg
zr tb, V cenl gurr; sbe bhe snzvyl ungu n fnpevsvpr va gur pvgl; naq
zl oebgure, ur ungu pbzznaqrq zr gb or gurer: naq abj, vs V unir sbhaq
snibhe va guvar rlrf, yrg zr trg njnl, V cenl gurr, naq frr zl
oerguera. Gurersber ur pbzrgu abg hagb gur xvat'f gnoyr.

20:30 Gura Fnhy'f natre jnf xvaqyrq ntnvafg Wbanguna, naq ur fnvq hagb
uvz, Gubh fba bs gur creirefr eroryyvbhf jbzna, qb abg V xabj gung
gubh unfg pubfra gur fba bs Wrffr gb guvar bja pbashfvba, naq hagb gur
pbashfvba bs gul zbgure'f anxrqarff?  20:31 Sbe nf ybat nf gur fba bs
Wrffr yvirgu hcba gur tebhaq, gubh funyg abg or rfgnoyvfurq, abe gul
xvatqbz. Jurersber abj fraq naq srgpu uvz hagb zr, sbe ur funyy fheryl
qvr.

20:32 Naq Wbanguna nafjrerq Fnhy uvf sngure, naq fnvq hagb uvz,
Jurersber funyy ur or fynva? jung ungu ur qbar?  20:33 Naq Fnhy pnfg n
wniryva ng uvz gb fzvgr uvz: jurerol Wbanguna xarj gung vg jnf
qrgrezvarq bs uvf sngure gb fynl Qnivq.

20:34 Fb Wbanguna nebfr sebz gur gnoyr va svrepr natre, naq qvq rng ab
zrng gur frpbaq qnl bs gur zbagu: sbe ur jnf tevrirq sbe Qnivq,
orpnhfr uvf sngure unq qbar uvz funzr.

20:35 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gur zbeavat, gung Wbanguna jrag bhg vagb
gur svryq ng gur gvzr nccbvagrq jvgu Qnivq, naq n yvggyr ynq jvgu uvz.

20:36 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvf ynq, Eha, svaq bhg abj gur neebjf juvpu V
fubbg. Naq nf gur ynq ena, ur fubg na neebj orlbaq uvz.

20:37 Naq jura gur ynq jnf pbzr gb gur cynpr bs gur neebj juvpu
Wbanguna unq fubg, Wbanguna pevrq nsgre gur ynq, naq fnvq, Vf abg gur
neebj orlbaq gurr?  20:38 Naq Wbanguna pevrq nsgre gur ynq, Znxr
fcrrq, unfgr, fgnl abg. Naq Wbanguna'f ynq tngurerq hc gur neebjf, naq
pnzr gb uvf znfgre.

20:39 Ohg gur ynq xarj abg nal guvat: bayl Wbanguna naq Qnivq xarj gur
znggre.

20:40 Naq Wbanguna tnir uvf negvyyrel hagb uvf ynq, naq fnvq hagb uvz,
Tb, pneel gurz gb gur pvgl.

20:41 Naq nf fbba nf gur ynq jnf tbar, Qnivq nebfr bhg bs n cynpr
gbjneq gur fbhgu, naq sryy ba uvf snpr gb gur tebhaq, naq objrq
uvzfrys guerr gvzrf: naq gurl xvffrq bar nabgure, naq jrcg bar jvgu
nabgure, hagvy Qnivq rkprrqrq.

20:42 Naq Wbanguna fnvq gb Qnivq, Tb va crnpr, sbenfzhpu nf jr unir
fjbea obgu bs hf va gur anzr bs gur YBEQ, fnlvat, Gur YBEQ or orgjrra
zr naq gurr, naq orgjrra zl frrq naq gul frrq sbe rire. Naq ur nebfr
naq qrcnegrq: naq Wbanguna jrag vagb gur pvgl.

21:1 Gura pnzr Qnivq gb Abo gb Nuvzryrpu gur cevrfg: naq Nuvzryrpu jnf
nsenvq ng gur zrrgvat bs Qnivq, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Jul neg gubh nybar,
naq ab zna jvgu gurr?  21:2 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb Nuvzryrpu gur cevrfg,
Gur xvat ungu pbzznaqrq zr n ohfvarff, naq ungu fnvq hagb zr, Yrg ab
zna xabj nal guvat bs gur ohfvarff jurernobhg V fraq gurr, naq jung V
unir pbzznaqrq gurr: naq V unir nccbvagrq zl freinagf gb fhpu naq fhpu
n cynpr.

21:3 Abj gurersber jung vf haqre guvar unaq? tvir zr svir ybnirf bs
oernq va zvar unaq, be jung gurer vf cerfrag.

21:4 Naq gur cevrfg nafjrerq Qnivq, naq fnvq, Gurer vf ab pbzzba oernq
haqre zvar unaq, ohg gurer vf unyybjrq oernq; vs gur lbhat zra unir
xrcg gurzfryirf ng yrnfg sebz jbzra.

21:5 Naq Qnivq nafjrerq gur cevrfg, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Bs n gehgu
jbzra unir orra xrcg sebz hf nobhg gurfr guerr qnlf, fvapr V pnzr bhg,
naq gur irffryf bs gur lbhat zra ner ubyl, naq gur oernq vf va n
znaare pbzzba, lrn, gubhtu vg jrer fnapgvsvrq guvf qnl va gur irffry.

21:6 Fb gur cevrfg tnir uvz unyybjrq oernq: sbe gurer jnf ab oernq
gurer ohg gur furjoernq, gung jnf gnxra sebz orsber gur YBEQ, gb chg
ubg oernq va gur qnl jura vg jnf gnxra njnl.

21:7 Abj n pregnva zna bs gur freinagf bs Fnhy jnf gurer gung qnl,
qrgnvarq orsber gur YBEQ; naq uvf anzr jnf Qbrt, na Rqbzvgr, gur
puvrsrfg bs gur ureqzra gung orybatrq gb Fnhy.

21:8 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb Nuvzryrpu, Naq vf gurer abg urer haqre guvar
unaq fcrne be fjbeq? sbe V unir arvgure oebhtug zl fjbeq abe zl
jrncbaf jvgu zr, orpnhfr gur xvat'f ohfvarff erdhverq unfgr.

21:9 Naq gur cevrfg fnvq, Gur fjbeq bs Tbyvngu gur Cuvyvfgvar, jubz
gubh fyrjrfg va gur inyyrl bs Rynu, orubyq, vg vf urer jenccrq va n
pybgu oruvaq gur rcubq: vs gubh jvyg gnxr gung, gnxr vg: sbe gurer vf
ab bgure fnir gung urer. Naq Qnivq fnvq, Gurer vf abar yvxr gung; tvir
vg zr.

21:10 Naq Qnivq nebfr naq syrq gung qnl sbe srne bs Fnhy, naq jrag gb
Npuvfu gur xvat bs Tngu.

21:11 Naq gur freinagf bs Npuvfu fnvq hagb uvz, Vf abg guvf Qnivq gur
xvat bs gur ynaq? qvq gurl abg fvat bar gb nabgure bs uvz va qnaprf,
fnlvat, Fnhy ungu fynva uvf gubhfnaqf, naq Qnivq uvf gra gubhfnaqf?
21:12 Naq Qnivq ynvq hc gurfr jbeqf va uvf urneg, naq jnf fber nsenvq
bs Npuvfu gur xvat bs Tngu.

21:13 Naq ur punatrq uvf orunivbhe orsber gurz, naq srvtarq uvzfrys
znq va gurve unaqf, naq fpenooyrq ba gur qbbef bs gur tngr, naq yrg
uvf fcvggyr snyy qbja hcba uvf orneq.

21:14 Gura fnvq Npuvfu hagb uvf freinagf, Yb, lr frr gur zna vf znq:
jurersber gura unir lr oebhtug uvz gb zr?  21:15 Unir V arrq bs znq
zra, gung lr unir oebhtug guvf sryybj gb cynl gur znq zna va zl
cerfrapr? funyy guvf sryybj pbzr vagb zl ubhfr?  22:1 Qnivq gurersber
qrcnegrq gurapr, naq rfpncrq gb gur pnir Nqhyynz: naq jura uvf
oerguera naq nyy uvf sngure'f ubhfr urneq vg, gurl jrag qbja guvgure
gb uvz.

22:2 Naq rirel bar gung jnf va qvfgerff, naq rirel bar gung jnf va
qrog, naq rirel bar gung jnf qvfpbagragrq, tngurerq gurzfryirf hagb
uvz; naq ur orpnzr n pncgnva bire gurz: naq gurer jrer jvgu uvz nobhg
sbhe uhaqerq zra.

22:3 Naq Qnivq jrag gurapr gb Zvmcru bs Zbno: naq ur fnvq hagb gur
xvat bs Zbno, Yrg zl sngure naq zl zbgure, V cenl gurr, pbzr sbegu,
naq or jvgu lbh, gvyy V xabj jung Tbq jvyy qb sbe zr.

22:4 Naq ur oebhtug gurz orsber gur xvat bs Zbno: naq gurl qjryg jvgu
uvz nyy gur juvyr gung Qnivq jnf va gur ubyq.

22:5 Naq gur cebcurg Tnq fnvq hagb Qnivq, Novqr abg va gur ubyq;
qrcneg, naq trg gurr vagb gur ynaq bs Whqnu. Gura Qnivq qrcnegrq, naq
pnzr vagb gur sberfg bs Unergu.

22:6 Jura Fnhy urneq gung Qnivq jnf qvfpbirerq, naq gur zra gung jrer
jvgu uvz, (abj Fnhy nobqr va Tvornu haqre n gerr va Enznu, univat uvf
fcrne va uvf unaq, naq nyy uvf freinagf jrer fgnaqvat nobhg uvz;) 22:7
Gura Fnhy fnvq hagb uvf freinagf gung fgbbq nobhg uvz, Urne abj, lr
Orawnzvgrf; jvyy gur fba bs Wrffr tvir rirel bar bs lbh svryqf naq
ivarlneqf, naq znxr lbh nyy pncgnvaf bs gubhfnaqf, naq pncgnvaf bs
uhaqerqf; 22:8 Gung nyy bs lbh unir pbafcverq ntnvafg zr, naq gurer vf
abar gung furjrgu zr gung zl fba ungu znqr n yrnthr jvgu gur fba bs
Wrffr, naq gurer vf abar bs lbh gung vf fbeel sbe zr, be furjrgu hagb
zr gung zl fba ungu fgveerq hc zl freinag ntnvafg zr, gb yvr va jnvg,
nf ng guvf qnl?  22:9 Gura nafjrerq Qbrt gur Rqbzvgr, juvpu jnf frg
bire gur freinagf bs Fnhy, naq fnvq, V fnj gur fba bs Wrffr pbzvat gb
Abo, gb Nuvzryrpu gur fba bs Nuvgho.

22:10 Naq ur radhverq bs gur YBEQ sbe uvz, naq tnir uvz ivpghnyf, naq
tnir uvz gur fjbeq bs Tbyvngu gur Cuvyvfgvar.

22:11 Gura gur xvat frag gb pnyy Nuvzryrpu gur cevrfg, gur fba bs
Nuvgho, naq nyy uvf sngure'f ubhfr, gur cevrfgf gung jrer va Abo: naq
gurl pnzr nyy bs gurz gb gur xvat.

22:12 Naq Fnhy fnvq, Urne abj, gubh fba bs Nuvgho. Naq ur nafjrerq,
Urer V nz, zl ybeq.

22:13 Naq Fnhy fnvq hagb uvz, Jul unir lr pbafcverq ntnvafg zr, gubh
naq gur fba bs Wrffr, va gung gubh unfg tvira uvz oernq, naq n fjbeq,
naq unfg radhverq bs Tbq sbe uvz, gung ur fubhyq evfr ntnvafg zr, gb
yvr va jnvg, nf ng guvf qnl?  22:14 Gura Nuvzryrpu nafjrerq gur xvat,
naq fnvq, Naq jub vf fb snvgushy nzbat nyy gul freinagf nf Qnivq,
juvpu vf gur xvat'f fba va ynj, naq tbrgu ng gul ovqqvat, naq vf
ubabhenoyr va guvar ubhfr?  22:15 Qvq V gura ortva gb radhver bs Tbq
sbe uvz? or vg sne sebz zr: yrg abg gur xvat vzchgr nal guvat hagb uvf
freinag, abe gb nyy gur ubhfr bs zl sngure: sbe gul freinag xarj
abguvat bs nyy guvf, yrff be zber.

22:16 Naq gur xvat fnvq, Gubh funyg fheryl qvr, Nuvzryrpu, gubh, naq
nyy gul sngure'f ubhfr.

22:17 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb gur sbbgzra gung fgbbq nobhg uvz, Ghea,
naq fynl gur cevrfgf bs gur YBEQ: orpnhfr gurve unaq nyfb vf jvgu
Qnivq, naq orpnhfr gurl xarj jura ur syrq, naq qvq abg furj vg gb zr.
Ohg gur freinagf bs gur xvat jbhyq abg chg sbegu gurve unaq gb snyy
hcba gur cevrfgf bs gur YBEQ.

22:18 Naq gur xvat fnvq gb Qbrt, Ghea gubh, naq snyy hcba gur cevrfgf.
Naq Qbrt gur Rqbzvgr ghearq, naq ur sryy hcba gur cevrfgf, naq fyrj ba
gung qnl sbhefpber naq svir crefbaf gung qvq jrne n yvara rcubq.

22:19 Naq Abo, gur pvgl bs gur cevrfgf, fzbgr ur jvgu gur rqtr bs gur
fjbeq, obgu zra naq jbzra, puvyqera naq fhpxyvatf, naq bkra, naq
nffrf, naq furrc, jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq.

22:20 Naq bar bs gur fbaf bs Nuvzryrpu gur fba bs Nuvgho, anzrq
Novngune, rfpncrq, naq syrq nsgre Qnivq.

22:21 Naq Novngune furjrq Qnivq gung Fnhy unq fynva gur YBEQ'f
cevrfgf.

22:22 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb Novngune, V xarj vg gung qnl, jura Qbrt gur
Rqbzvgr jnf gurer, gung ur jbhyq fheryl gryy Fnhy: V unir bppnfvbarq
gur qrngu bs nyy gur crefbaf bs gul sngure'f ubhfr.

22:23 Novqr gubh jvgu zr, srne abg: sbe ur gung frrxrgu zl yvsr
frrxrgu gul yvsr: ohg jvgu zr gubh funyg or va fnsrthneq.

23:1 Gura gurl gbyq Qnivq, fnlvat, Orubyq, gur Cuvyvfgvarf svtug
ntnvafg Xrvynu, naq gurl ebo gur guerfuvatsybbef.

23:2 Gurersber Qnivq radhverq bs gur YBEQ, fnlvat, Funyy V tb naq
fzvgr gurfr Cuvyvfgvarf? Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Qnivq, Tb, naq fzvgr
gur Cuvyvfgvarf, naq fnir Xrvynu.

23:3 Naq Qnivq'f zra fnvq hagb uvz, Orubyq, jr or nsenvq urer va
Whqnu: ubj zhpu zber gura vs jr pbzr gb Xrvynu ntnvafg gur nezvrf bs
gur Cuvyvfgvarf?  23:4 Gura Qnivq radhverq bs gur YBEQ lrg ntnva. Naq
gur YBEQ nafjrerq uvz naq fnvq, Nevfr, tb qbja gb Xrvynu; sbe V jvyy
qryvire gur Cuvyvfgvarf vagb guvar unaq.

23:5 Fb Qnivq naq uvf zra jrag gb Xrvynu, naq sbhtug jvgu gur
Cuvyvfgvarf, naq oebhtug njnl gurve pnggyr, naq fzbgr gurz jvgu n
terng fynhtugre. Fb Qnivq fnirq gur vaunovgnagf bs Xrvynu.

23:6 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Novngune gur fba bs Nuvzryrpu syrq gb
Qnivq gb Xrvynu, gung ur pnzr qbja jvgu na rcubq va uvf unaq.

23:7 Naq vg jnf gbyq Fnhy gung Qnivq jnf pbzr gb Xrvynu. Naq Fnhy
fnvq, Tbq ungu qryvirerq uvz vagb zvar unaq; sbe ur vf fuhg va, ol
ragrevat vagb n gbja gung ungu tngrf naq onef.

23:8 Naq Fnhy pnyyrq nyy gur crbcyr gbtrgure gb jne, gb tb qbja gb
Xrvynu, gb orfvrtr Qnivq naq uvf zra.

23:9 Naq Qnivq xarj gung Fnhy frpergyl cenpgvfrq zvfpuvrs ntnvafg uvz;
naq ur fnvq gb Novngune gur cevrfg, Oevat uvgure gur rcubq.

23:10 Gura fnvq Qnivq, B YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, gul freinag ungu
pregnvayl urneq gung Fnhy frrxrgu gb pbzr gb Xrvynu, gb qrfgebl gur
pvgl sbe zl fnxr.

23:11 Jvyy gur zra bs Xrvynu qryvire zr hc vagb uvf unaq? jvyy Fnhy
pbzr qbja, nf gul freinag ungu urneq? B YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, V orfrrpu
gurr, gryy gul freinag. Naq gur YBEQ fnvq, Ur jvyy pbzr qbja.

23:12 Gura fnvq Qnivq, Jvyy gur zra bs Xrvynu qryvire zr naq zl zra
vagb gur unaq bs Fnhy? Naq gur YBEQ fnvq, Gurl jvyy qryvire gurr hc.

23:13 Gura Qnivq naq uvf zra, juvpu jrer nobhg fvk uhaqerq, nebfr naq
qrcnegrq bhg bs Xrvynu, naq jrag juvgurefbrire gurl pbhyq tb. Naq vg
jnf gbyq Fnhy gung Qnivq jnf rfpncrq sebz Xrvynu; naq ur sbeoner gb tb
sbegu.

23:14 Naq Qnivq nobqr va gur jvyqrearff va fgebat ubyqf, naq erznvarq
va n zbhagnva va gur jvyqrearff bs Mvcu. Naq Fnhy fbhtug uvz rirel
qnl, ohg Tbq qryvirerq uvz abg vagb uvf unaq.

23:15 Naq Qnivq fnj gung Fnhy jnf pbzr bhg gb frrx uvf yvsr: naq Qnivq
jnf va gur jvyqrearff bs Mvcu va n jbbq.

23:16 Naq Wbanguna Fnhy'f fba nebfr, naq jrag gb Qnivq vagb gur jbbq,
naq fgeratgurarq uvf unaq va Tbq.

23:17 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Srne abg: sbe gur unaq bs Fnhy zl sngure
funyy abg svaq gurr; naq gubh funyg or xvat bire Vfenry, naq V funyy
or arkg hagb gurr; naq gung nyfb Fnhy zl sngure xabjrgu.

23:18 Naq gurl gjb znqr n pbiranag orsber gur YBEQ: naq Qnivq nobqr va
gur jbbq, naq Wbanguna jrag gb uvf ubhfr.

23:19 Gura pnzr hc gur Mvcuvgrf gb Fnhy gb Tvornu, fnlvat, Qbgu abg
Qnivq uvqr uvzfrys jvgu hf va fgebat ubyqf va gur jbbq, va gur uvyy bs
Unpuvynu, juvpu vf ba gur fbhgu bs Wrfuvzba?  23:20 Abj gurersber, B
xvat, pbzr qbja nppbeqvat gb nyy gur qrfver bs gul fbhy gb pbzr qbja;
naq bhe cneg funyy or gb qryvire uvz vagb gur xvat'f unaq.

23:21 Naq Fnhy fnvq, Oyrffrq or lr bs gur YBEQ; sbe lr unir pbzcnffvba
ba zr.

23:22 Tb, V cenl lbh, cercner lrg, naq xabj naq frr uvf cynpr jurer
uvf unhag vf, naq jub ungu frra uvz gurer: sbe vg vf gbyq zr gung ur
qrnyrgu irel fhogvyyl.

23:23 Frr gurersber, naq gnxr xabjyrqtr bs nyy gur yhexvat cynprf
jurer ur uvqrgu uvzfrys, naq pbzr lr ntnva gb zr jvgu gur pregnvagl,
naq V jvyy tb jvgu lbh: naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, vs ur or va gur
ynaq, gung V jvyy frnepu uvz bhg guebhtubhg nyy gur gubhfnaqf bs
Whqnu.

23:24 Naq gurl nebfr, naq jrag gb Mvcu orsber Fnhy: ohg Qnivq naq uvf
zra jrer va gur jvyqrearff bs Znba, va gur cynva ba gur fbhgu bs
Wrfuvzba.

23:25 Fnhy nyfb naq uvf zra jrag gb frrx uvz. Naq gurl gbyq Qnivq;
jurersber ur pnzr qbja vagb n ebpx, naq nobqr va gur jvyqrearff bs
Znba. Naq jura Fnhy urneq gung, ur chefhrq nsgre Qnivq va gur
jvyqrearff bs Znba.

23:26 Naq Fnhy jrag ba guvf fvqr bs gur zbhagnva, naq Qnivq naq uvf
zra ba gung fvqr bs gur zbhagnva: naq Qnivq znqr unfgr gb trg njnl sbe
srne bs Fnhy; sbe Fnhy naq uvf zra pbzcnffrq Qnivq naq uvf zra ebhaq
nobhg gb gnxr gurz.

23:27 Ohg gurer pnzr n zrffratre hagb Fnhy, fnlvat, Unfgr gurr, naq
pbzr; sbe gur Cuvyvfgvarf unir vainqrq gur ynaq.

23:28 Jurersber Fnhy erghearq sebz chefhvat nsgre Qnivq, naq jrag
ntnvafg gur Cuvyvfgvarf: gurersber gurl pnyyrq gung cynpr
Frynunzznuyrxbgu.

23:29 Naq Qnivq jrag hc sebz gurapr, naq qjryg va fgebat ubyqf ng
Ratrqv.

24:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Fnhy jnf erghearq sebz sbyybjvat gur
Cuvyvfgvarf, gung vg jnf gbyq uvz, fnlvat, Orubyq, Qnivq vf va gur
jvyqrearff bs Ratrqv.

24:2 Gura Fnhy gbbx guerr gubhfnaq pubfra zra bhg bs nyy Vfenry, naq
jrag gb frrx Qnivq naq uvf zra hcba gur ebpxf bs gur jvyq tbngf.

24:3 Naq ur pnzr gb gur furrcpbgrf ol gur jnl, jurer jnf n pnir; naq
Fnhy jrag va gb pbire uvf srrg: naq Qnivq naq uvf zra erznvarq va gur
fvqrf bs gur pnir.

24:4 Naq gur zra bs Qnivq fnvq hagb uvz, Orubyq gur qnl bs juvpu gur
YBEQ fnvq hagb gurr, Orubyq, V jvyy qryvire guvar rarzl vagb guvar
unaq, gung gubh znlrfg qb gb uvz nf vg funyy frrz tbbq hagb gurr. Gura
Qnivq nebfr, naq phg bss gur fxveg bs Fnhy'f ebor cevivyl.

24:5 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgrejneq, gung Qnivq'f urneg fzbgr uvz,
orpnhfr ur unq phg bss Fnhy'f fxveg.

24:6 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvf zra, Gur YBEQ sbeovq gung V fubhyq qb guvf
guvat hagb zl znfgre, gur YBEQ'f nabvagrq, gb fgergpu sbegu zvar unaq
ntnvafg uvz, frrvat ur vf gur nabvagrq bs gur YBEQ.

24:7 Fb Qnivq fgnlrq uvf freinagf jvgu gurfr jbeqf, naq fhssrerq gurz
abg gb evfr ntnvafg Fnhy. Ohg Fnhy ebfr hc bhg bs gur pnir, naq jrag
ba uvf jnl.

24:8 Qnivq nyfb nebfr nsgrejneq, naq jrag bhg bs gur pnir, naq pevrq
nsgre Fnhy, fnlvat, Zl ybeq gur xvat. Naq jura Fnhy ybbxrq oruvaq uvz,
Qnivq fgbbcrq jvgu uvf snpr gb gur rnegu, naq objrq uvzfrys.

24:9 Naq Qnivq fnvq gb Fnhy, Jurersber urnerfg gubh zra'f jbeqf,
fnlvat, Orubyq, Qnivq frrxrgu gul uheg?  24:10 Orubyq, guvf qnl guvar
rlrf unir frra ubj gung gur YBEQ unq qryvirerq gurr gb qnl vagb zvar
unaq va gur pnir: naq fbzr onqr zr xvyy gurr: ohg zvar rlr fcnerq
gurr; naq V fnvq, V jvyy abg chg sbegu zvar unaq ntnvafg zl ybeq; sbe
ur vf gur YBEQ'f nabvagrq.

24:11 Zberbire, zl sngure, frr, lrn, frr gur fxveg bs gul ebor va zl
unaq: sbe va gung V phg bss gur fxveg bs gul ebor, naq xvyyrq gurr
abg, xabj gubh naq frr gung gurer vf arvgure rivy abe genafterffvba va
zvar unaq, naq V unir abg fvaarq ntnvafg gurr; lrg gubh uhagrfg zl
fbhy gb gnxr vg.

24:12 Gur YBEQ whqtr orgjrra zr naq gurr, naq gur YBEQ niratr zr bs
gurr: ohg zvar unaq funyy abg or hcba gurr.

24:13 Nf fnvgu gur cebireo bs gur napvragf, Jvpxrqarff cebprrqrgu sebz
gur jvpxrq: ohg zvar unaq funyy abg or hcba gurr.

24:14 Nsgre jubz vf gur xvat bs Vfenry pbzr bhg? nsgre jubz qbfg gubh
chefhr? nsgre n qrnq qbt, nsgre n syrn.

24:15 Gur YBEQ gurersber or whqtr, naq whqtr orgjrra zr naq gurr, naq
frr, naq cyrnq zl pnhfr, naq qryvire zr bhg bs guvar unaq.

24:16 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Qnivq unq znqr na raq bs fcrnxvat
gurfr jbeqf hagb Fnhy, gung Fnhy fnvq, Vf guvf gul ibvpr, zl fba
Qnivq? Naq Fnhy yvsgrq hc uvf ibvpr, naq jrcg.

24:17 Naq ur fnvq gb Qnivq, Gubh neg zber evtugrbhf guna V: sbe gubh
unfg erjneqrq zr tbbq, jurernf V unir erjneqrq gurr rivy.

24:18 Naq gubh unfg furjrq guvf qnl ubj gung gubh unfg qrnyg jryy jvgu
zr: sbenfzhpu nf jura gur YBEQ unq qryvirerq zr vagb guvar unaq, gubh
xvyyrqfg zr abg.

24:19 Sbe vs n zna svaq uvf rarzl, jvyy ur yrg uvz tb jryy njnl?
jurersber gur YBEQ erjneq gurr tbbq sbe gung gubh unfg qbar hagb zr
guvf qnl.

24:20 Naq abj, orubyq, V xabj jryy gung gubh funyg fheryl or xvat, naq
gung gur xvatqbz bs Vfenry funyy or rfgnoyvfurq va guvar unaq.

24:21 Fjrne abj gurersber hagb zr ol gur YBEQ, gung gubh jvyg abg phg
bss zl frrq nsgre zr, naq gung gubh jvyg abg qrfgebl zl anzr bhg bs zl
sngure'f ubhfr.

24:22 Naq Qnivq fjner hagb Fnhy. Naq Fnhy jrag ubzr; ohg Qnivq naq uvf
zra tng gurz hc hagb gur ubyq.

25:1 Naq Fnzhry qvrq; naq nyy gur Vfenryvgrf jrer tngurerq gbtrgure,
naq ynzragrq uvz, naq ohevrq uvz va uvf ubhfr ng Enznu. Naq Qnivq
nebfr, naq jrag qbja gb gur jvyqrearff bs Cnena.

25:2 Naq gurer jnf n zna va Znba, jubfr cbffrffvbaf jrer va Pnezry;
naq gur zna jnf irel terng, naq ur unq guerr gubhfnaq furrc, naq n
gubhfnaq tbngf: naq ur jnf furnevat uvf furrc va Pnezry.

25:3 Abj gur anzr bs gur zna jnf Anony; naq gur anzr bs uvf jvsr
Novtnvy: naq fur jnf n jbzna bs tbbq haqrefgnaqvat, naq bs n ornhgvshy
pbhagranapr: ohg gur zna jnf puheyvfu naq rivy va uvf qbvatf; naq ur
jnf bs gur ubhfr bs Pnyro.

25:4 Naq Qnivq urneq va gur jvyqrearff gung Anony qvq furne uvf furrc.

25:5 Naq Qnivq frag bhg gra lbhat zra, naq Qnivq fnvq hagb gur lbhat
zra, Trg lbh hc gb Pnezry, naq tb gb Anony, naq terrg uvz va zl anzr:
25:6 Naq guhf funyy lr fnl gb uvz gung yvirgu va cebfcrevgl, Crnpr or
obgu gb gurr, naq crnpr or gb guvar ubhfr, naq crnpr or hagb nyy gung
gubh unfg.

25:7 Naq abj V unir urneq gung gubh unfg furneref: abj gul furcureqf
juvpu jrer jvgu hf, jr uheg gurz abg, arvgure jnf gurer bhtug zvffvat
hagb gurz, nyy gur juvyr gurl jrer va Pnezry.

25:8 Nfx gul lbhat zra, naq gurl jvyy furj gurr. Jurersber yrg gur
lbhat zra svaq snibhe va guvar rlrf: sbe jr pbzr va n tbbq qnl: tvir,
V cenl gurr, jungfbrire pbzrgu gb guvar unaq hagb gul freinagf, naq gb
gul fba Qnivq.

25:9 Naq jura Qnivq'f lbhat zra pnzr, gurl fcnxr gb Anony nppbeqvat gb
nyy gubfr jbeqf va gur anzr bs Qnivq, naq prnfrq.

25:10 Naq Anony nafjrerq Qnivq'f freinagf, naq fnvq, Jub vf Qnivq? naq
jub vf gur fba bs Wrffr? gurer or znal freinagf abj n qnlf gung oernx
njnl rirel zna sebz uvf znfgre.

25:11 Funyy V gura gnxr zl oernq, naq zl jngre, naq zl syrfu gung V
unir xvyyrq sbe zl furneref, naq tvir vg hagb zra, jubz V xabj abg
jurapr gurl or?  25:12 Fb Qnivq'f lbhat zra ghearq gurve jnl, naq jrag
ntnva, naq pnzr naq gbyq uvz nyy gubfr fnlvatf.

25:13 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb uvf zra, Tveq lr ba rirel zna uvf fjbeq. Naq
gurl tveqrq ba rirel zna uvf fjbeq; naq Qnivq nyfb tveqrq ba uvf
fjbeq: naq gurer jrag hc nsgre Qnivq nobhg sbhe uhaqerq zra; naq gjb
uhaqerq nobqr ol gur fghss.

25:14 Ohg bar bs gur lbhat zra gbyq Novtnvy, Anony'f jvsr, fnlvat,
Orubyq, Qnivq frag zrffratref bhg bs gur jvyqrearff gb fnyhgr bhe
znfgre; naq ur envyrq ba gurz.

25:15 Ohg gur zra jrer irel tbbq hagb hf, naq jr jrer abg uheg,
arvgure zvffrq jr nal guvat, nf ybat nf jr jrer pbairefnag jvgu gurz,
jura jr jrer va gur svryqf: 25:16 Gurl jrer n jnyy hagb hf obgu ol
avtug naq qnl, nyy gur juvyr jr jrer jvgu gurz xrrcvat gur furrc.

25:17 Abj gurersber xabj naq pbafvqre jung gubh jvyg qb; sbe rivy vf
qrgrezvarq ntnvafg bhe znfgre, naq ntnvafg nyy uvf ubhfrubyq: sbe ur
vf fhpu n fba bs Oryvny, gung n zna pnaabg fcrnx gb uvz.

25:18 Gura Novtnvy znqr unfgr, naq gbbx gjb uhaqerq ybnirf, naq gjb
obggyrf bs jvar, naq svir furrc ernql qerffrq, naq svir zrnfherf bs
cnepurq pbea, naq na uhaqerq pyhfgref bs envfvaf, naq gjb uhaqerq
pnxrf bs svtf, naq ynvq gurz ba nffrf.

25:19 Naq fur fnvq hagb ure freinagf, Tb ba orsber zr; orubyq, V pbzr
nsgre lbh. Ohg fur gbyq abg ure uhfonaq Anony.

25:20 Naq vg jnf fb, nf fur ebqr ba gur nff, gung fur pnzr qbja ol gur
pbireg ba gur uvyy, naq, orubyq, Qnivq naq uvf zra pnzr qbja ntnvafg
ure; naq fur zrg gurz.

25:21 Abj Qnivq unq fnvq, Fheryl va inva unir V xrcg nyy gung guvf
sryybj ungu va gur jvyqrearff, fb gung abguvat jnf zvffrq bs nyy gung
cregnvarq hagb uvz: naq ur ungu erdhvgrq zr rivy sbe tbbq.

25:22 Fb naq zber nyfb qb Tbq hagb gur rarzvrf bs Qnivq, vs V yrnir bs
nyy gung cregnva gb uvz ol gur zbeavat yvtug nal gung cvffrgu ntnvafg
gur jnyy.

25:23 Naq jura Novtnvy fnj Qnivq, fur unfgrq, naq yvtugrq bss gur nff,
naq sryy orsber Qnivq ba ure snpr, naq objrq urefrys gb gur tebhaq,
25:24 Naq sryy ng uvf srrg, naq fnvq, Hcba zr, zl ybeq, hcba zr yrg
guvf vavdhvgl or: naq yrg guvar unaqznvq, V cenl gurr, fcrnx va guvar
nhqvrapr, naq urne gur jbeqf bs guvar unaqznvq.

25:25 Yrg abg zl ybeq, V cenl gurr, ertneq guvf zna bs Oryvny, rira
Anony: sbe nf uvf anzr vf, fb vf ur; Anony vf uvf anzr, naq sbyyl vf
jvgu uvz: ohg V guvar unaqznvq fnj abg gur lbhat zra bs zl ybeq, jubz
gubh qvqfg fraq.

25:26 Abj gurersber, zl ybeq, nf gur YBEQ yvirgu, naq nf gul fbhy
yvirgu, frrvat gur YBEQ ungu jvguubyqra gurr sebz pbzvat gb furq
oybbq, naq sebz niratvat gulfrys jvgu guvar bja unaq, abj yrg guvar
rarzvrf, naq gurl gung frrx rivy gb zl ybeq, or nf Anony.

25:27 Naq abj guvf oyrffvat juvpu guvar unaqznvq ungu oebhtug hagb zl
ybeq, yrg vg rira or tvira hagb gur lbhat zra gung sbyybj zl ybeq.

25:28 V cenl gurr, sbetvir gur gerfcnff bs guvar unaqznvq: sbe gur
YBEQ jvyy pregnvayl znxr zl ybeq n fher ubhfr; orpnhfr zl ybeq
svtugrgu gur onggyrf bs gur YBEQ, naq rivy ungu abg orra sbhaq va gurr
nyy gul qnlf.

25:29 Lrg n zna vf evfra gb chefhr gurr, naq gb frrx gul fbhy: ohg gur
fbhy bs zl ybeq funyy or obhaq va gur ohaqyr bs yvsr jvgu gur YBEQ gul
Tbq; naq gur fbhyf bs guvar rarzvrf, gurz funyy ur fyvat bhg, nf bhg
bs gur zvqqyr bs n fyvat.

25:30 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, jura gur YBEQ funyy unir qbar gb zl
ybeq nppbeqvat gb nyy gur tbbq gung ur ungu fcbxra pbapreavat gurr,
naq funyy unir nccbvagrq gurr ehyre bire Vfenry; 25:31 Gung guvf funyy
or ab tevrs hagb gurr, abe bssrapr bs urneg hagb zl ybeq, rvgure gung
gubh unfg furq oybbq pnhfryrff, be gung zl ybeq ungu niratrq uvzfrys:
ohg jura gur YBEQ funyy unir qrnyg jryy jvgu zl ybeq, gura erzrzore
guvar unaqznvq.

25:32 Naq Qnivq fnvq gb Novtnvy, Oyrffrq or gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry,
juvpu frag gurr guvf qnl gb zrrg zr: 25:33 Naq oyrffrq or gul nqivpr,
naq oyrffrq or gubh, juvpu unfg xrcg zr guvf qnl sebz pbzvat gb furq
oybbq, naq sebz niratvat zlfrys jvgu zvar bja unaq.

25:34 Sbe va irel qrrq, nf gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry yvirgu, juvpu ungu
xrcg zr onpx sebz uhegvat gurr, rkprcg gubh unqfg unfgrq naq pbzr gb
zrrg zr, fheryl gurer unq abg orra yrsg hagb Anony ol gur zbeavat
yvtug nal gung cvffrgu ntnvafg gur jnyy.

25:35 Fb Qnivq erprvirq bs ure unaq gung juvpu fur unq oebhtug uvz,
naq fnvq hagb ure, Tb hc va crnpr gb guvar ubhfr; frr, V unir
urnexrarq gb gul ibvpr, naq unir npprcgrq gul crefba.

25:36 Naq Novtnvy pnzr gb Anony; naq, orubyq, ur uryq n srnfg va uvf
ubhfr, yvxr gur srnfg bs n xvat; naq Anony'f urneg jnf zreel jvguva
uvz, sbe ur jnf irel qehaxra: jurersber fur gbyq uvz abguvat, yrff be
zber, hagvy gur zbeavat yvtug.

25:37 Ohg vg pnzr gb cnff va gur zbeavat, jura gur jvar jnf tbar bhg
bs Anony, naq uvf jvsr unq gbyq uvz gurfr guvatf, gung uvf urneg qvrq
jvguva uvz, naq ur orpnzr nf n fgbar.

25:38 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nobhg gra qnlf nsgre, gung gur YBEQ fzbgr
Anony, gung ur qvrq.

25:39 Naq jura Qnivq urneq gung Anony jnf qrnq, ur fnvq, Oyrffrq or
gur YBEQ, gung ungu cyrnqrq gur pnhfr bs zl ercebnpu sebz gur unaq bs
Anony, naq ungu xrcg uvf freinag sebz rivy: sbe gur YBEQ ungu erghearq
gur jvpxrqarff bs Anony hcba uvf bja urnq. Naq Qnivq frag naq pbzzharq
jvgu Novtnvy, gb gnxr ure gb uvz gb jvsr.

25:40 Naq jura gur freinagf bs Qnivq jrer pbzr gb Novtnvy gb Pnezry,
gurl fcnxr hagb ure, fnlvat, Qnivq frag hf hagb gurr, gb gnxr gurr gb
uvz gb jvsr.

25:41 Naq fur nebfr, naq objrq urefrys ba ure snpr gb gur rnegu, naq
fnvq, Orubyq, yrg guvar unaqznvq or n freinag gb jnfu gur srrg bs gur
freinagf bs zl ybeq.

25:42 Naq Novtnvy unfgrq, naq nebfr naq ebqr hcba na nff, jvgu svir
qnzfryf bs uref gung jrag nsgre ure; naq fur jrag nsgre gur zrffratref
bs Qnivq, naq orpnzr uvf jvsr.

25:43 Qnivq nyfb gbbx Nuvabnz bs Wrmerry; naq gurl jrer nyfb obgu bs
gurz uvf jvirf.

25:44 Ohg Fnhy unq tvira Zvpuny uvf qnhtugre, Qnivq'f jvsr, gb Cunygv
gur fba bs Ynvfu, juvpu jnf bs Tnyyvz.

26:1 Naq gur Mvcuvgrf pnzr hagb Fnhy gb Tvornu, fnlvat, Qbgu abg Qnivq
uvqr uvzfrys va gur uvyy bs Unpuvynu, juvpu vf orsber Wrfuvzba?  26:2
Gura Fnhy nebfr, naq jrag qbja gb gur jvyqrearff bs Mvcu, univat guerr
gubhfnaq pubfra zra bs Vfenry jvgu uvz, gb frrx Qnivq va gur
jvyqrearff bs Mvcu.

26:3 Naq Fnhy cvgpurq va gur uvyy bs Unpuvynu, juvpu vf orsber
Wrfuvzba, ol gur jnl. Ohg Qnivq nobqr va gur jvyqrearff, naq ur fnj
gung Fnhy pnzr nsgre uvz vagb gur jvyqrearff.

26:4 Qnivq gurersber frag bhg fcvrf, naq haqrefgbbq gung Fnhy jnf pbzr
va irel qrrq.

26:5 Naq Qnivq nebfr, naq pnzr gb gur cynpr jurer Fnhy unq cvgpurq:
naq Qnivq oruryq gur cynpr jurer Fnhy ynl, naq Noare gur fba bs Are,
gur pncgnva bs uvf ubfg: naq Fnhy ynl va gur gerapu, naq gur crbcyr
cvgpurq ebhaq nobhg uvz.

26:6 Gura nafjrerq Qnivq naq fnvq gb Nuvzryrpu gur Uvggvgr, naq gb
Novfunv gur fba bs Mrehvnu, oebgure gb Wbno, fnlvat, Jub jvyy tb qbja
jvgu zr gb Fnhy gb gur pnzc? Naq Novfunv fnvq, V jvyy tb qbja jvgu
gurr.

26:7 Fb Qnivq naq Novfunv pnzr gb gur crbcyr ol avtug: naq, orubyq,
Fnhy ynl fyrrcvat jvguva gur gerapu, naq uvf fcrne fghpx va gur tebhaq
ng uvf obyfgre: ohg Noare naq gur crbcyr ynl ebhaq nobhg uvz.

26:8 Gura fnvq Novfunv gb Qnivq, Tbq ungu qryvirerq guvar rarzl vagb
guvar unaq guvf qnl: abj gurersber yrg zr fzvgr uvz, V cenl gurr, jvgu
gur fcrne rira gb gur rnegu ng bapr, naq V jvyy abg fzvgr uvz gur
frpbaq gvzr.

26:9 Naq Qnivq fnvq gb Novfunv, Qrfgebl uvz abg: sbe jub pna fgergpu
sbegu uvf unaq ntnvafg gur YBEQ'f nabvagrq, naq or thvygyrff?  26:10
Qnivq fnvq shegurezber, Nf gur YBEQ yvirgu, gur YBEQ funyy fzvgr uvz;
be uvf qnl funyy pbzr gb qvr; be ur funyy qrfpraq vagb onggyr, naq
crevfu.

26:11 Gur YBEQ sbeovq gung V fubhyq fgergpu sbegu zvar unaq ntnvafg
gur YBEQ'f nabvagrq: ohg, V cenl gurr, gnxr gubh abj gur fcrne gung vf
ng uvf obyfgre, naq gur pehfr bs jngre, naq yrg hf tb.

26:12 Fb Qnivq gbbx gur fcrne naq gur pehfr bs jngre sebz Fnhy'f
obyfgre; naq gurl tng gurz njnl, naq ab zna fnj vg, abe xarj vg,
arvgure njnxrq: sbe gurl jrer nyy nfyrrc; orpnhfr n qrrc fyrrc sebz
gur YBEQ jnf snyyra hcba gurz.

26:13 Gura Qnivq jrag bire gb gur bgure fvqr, naq fgbbq ba gur gbc bs
na uvyy nsne bss; n terng fcnpr orvat orgjrra gurz: 26:14 Naq Qnivq
pevrq gb gur crbcyr, naq gb Noare gur fba bs Are, fnlvat, Nafjrerfg
gubh abg, Noare? Gura Noare nafjrerq naq fnvq, Jub neg gubh gung
pevrfg gb gur xvat?  26:15 Naq Qnivq fnvq gb Noare, Neg abg gubh n
inyvnag zna? naq jub vf yvxr gb gurr va Vfenry? jurersber gura unfg
gubh abg xrcg gul ybeq gur xvat? sbe gurer pnzr bar bs gur crbcyr va
gb qrfgebl gur xvat gul ybeq.

26:16 Guvf guvat vf abg tbbq gung gubh unfg qbar. Nf gur YBEQ yvirgu,
lr ner jbegul gb qvr, orpnhfr lr unir abg xrcg lbhe znfgre, gur YBEQ'f
nabvagrq.

Naq abj frr jurer gur xvat'f fcrne vf, naq gur pehfr bs jngre gung jnf
ng uvf obyfgre.

26:17 Naq Fnhy xarj Qnivq'f ibvpr, naq fnvq, Vf guvf gul ibvpr, zl fba
Qnivq? Naq Qnivq fnvq, Vg vf zl ibvpr, zl ybeq, B xvat.

26:18 Naq ur fnvq, Jurersber qbgu zl ybeq guhf chefhr nsgre uvf
freinag?  sbe jung unir V qbar? be jung rivy vf va zvar unaq?  26:19
Abj gurersber, V cenl gurr, yrg zl ybeq gur xvat urne gur jbeqf bs uvf
freinag. Vs gur YBEQ unir fgveerq gurr hc ntnvafg zr, yrg uvz npprcg
na bssrevat: ohg vs gurl or gur puvyqera bs zra, phefrq or gurl orsber
gur YBEQ; sbe gurl unir qevira zr bhg guvf qnl sebz novqvat va gur
vaurevgnapr bs gur YBEQ, fnlvat, Tb, freir bgure tbqf.

26:20 Abj gurersber, yrg abg zl oybbq snyy gb gur rnegu orsber gur
snpr bs gur YBEQ: sbe gur xvat bs Vfenry vf pbzr bhg gb frrx n syrn,
nf jura bar qbgu uhag n cnegevqtr va gur zbhagnvaf.

26:21 Gura fnvq Fnhy, V unir fvaarq: erghea, zl fba Qnivq: sbe V jvyy
ab zber qb gurr unez, orpnhfr zl fbhy jnf cerpvbhf va guvar rlrf guvf
qnl: orubyq, V unir cynlrq gur sbby, naq unir reerq rkprrqvatyl.

26:22 Naq Qnivq nafjrerq naq fnvq, Orubyq gur xvat'f fcrne! naq yrg
bar bs gur lbhat zra pbzr bire naq srgpu vg.

26:23 Gur YBEQ eraqre gb rirel zna uvf evtugrbhfarff naq uvf
snvgushyarff; sbe gur YBEQ qryvirerq gurr vagb zl unaq gb qnl, ohg V
jbhyq abg fgergpu sbegu zvar unaq ntnvafg gur YBEQ'f nabvagrq.

26:24 Naq, orubyq, nf gul yvsr jnf zhpu frg ol guvf qnl va zvar rlrf,
fb yrg zl yvsr or zhpu frg ol va gur rlrf bs gur YBEQ, naq yrg uvz
qryvire zr bhg bs nyy gevohyngvba.

26:25 Gura Fnhy fnvq gb Qnivq, Oyrffrq or gubh, zl fba Qnivq: gubh
funyg obgu qb terng guvatf, naq nyfb funyg fgvyy cerinvy. Fb Qnivq
jrag ba uvf jnl, naq Fnhy erghearq gb uvf cynpr.

27:1 Naq Qnivq fnvq va uvf urneg, V funyy abj crevfu bar qnl ol gur
unaq bs Fnhy: gurer vf abguvat orggre sbe zr guna gung V fubhyq
fcrrqvyl rfpncr vagb gur ynaq bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf; naq Fnhy funyy
qrfcnve bs zr, gb frrx zr nal zber va nal pbnfg bs Vfenry: fb funyy V
rfpncr bhg bs uvf unaq.

27:2 Naq Qnivq nebfr, naq ur cnffrq bire jvgu gur fvk uhaqerq zra gung
jrer jvgu uvz hagb Npuvfu, gur fba bs Znbpu, xvat bs Tngu.

27:3 Naq Qnivq qjryg jvgu Npuvfu ng Tngu, ur naq uvf zra, rirel zna
jvgu uvf ubhfrubyq, rira Qnivq jvgu uvf gjb jvirf, Nuvabnz gur
Wrmerryvgrff, naq Novtnvy gur Pnezryvgrff, Anony'f jvsr.

27:4 Naq vg jnf gbyq Fnhy gung Qnivq jnf syrq gb Tngu: naq ur fbhtug
ab zber ntnva sbe uvz.

27:5 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb Npuvfu, Vs V unir abj sbhaq tenpr va guvar
rlrf, yrg gurz tvir zr n cynpr va fbzr gbja va gur pbhagel, gung V znl
qjryy gurer: sbe jul fubhyq gul freinag qjryy va gur eblny pvgl jvgu
gurr?  27:6 Gura Npuvfu tnir uvz Mvxynt gung qnl: jurersber Mvxynt
cregnvargu hagb gur xvatf bs Whqnu hagb guvf qnl.

27:7 Naq gur gvzr gung Qnivq qjryg va gur pbhagel bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf
jnf n shyy lrne naq sbhe zbaguf.

27:8 Naq Qnivq naq uvf zra jrag hc, naq vainqrq gur Trfuhevgrf, naq
gur Trmevgrf, naq gur Nznyrxvgrf: sbe gubfr angvbaf jrer bs byq gur
vaunovgnagf bs gur ynaq, nf gubh tbrfg gb Fuhe, rira hagb gur ynaq bs
Rtlcg.

27:9 Naq Qnivq fzbgr gur ynaq, naq yrsg arvgure zna abe jbzna nyvir,
naq gbbx njnl gur furrc, naq gur bkra, naq gur nffrf, naq gur pnzryf,
naq gur nccnery, naq erghearq, naq pnzr gb Npuvfu.

27:10 Naq Npuvfu fnvq, Juvgure unir lr znqr n ebnq gb qnl? Naq Qnivq
fnvq, Ntnvafg gur fbhgu bs Whqnu, naq ntnvafg gur fbhgu bs gur
Wrenuzrryvgrf, naq ntnvafg gur fbhgu bs gur Xravgrf.

27:11 Naq Qnivq fnirq arvgure zna abe jbzna nyvir, gb oevat gvqvatf gb
Tngu, fnlvat, Yrfg gurl fubhyq gryy ba hf, fnlvat, Fb qvq Qnivq, naq
fb jvyy or uvf znaare nyy gur juvyr ur qjryyrgu va gur pbhagel bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf.

27:12 Naq Npuvfu oryvrirq Qnivq, fnlvat, Ur ungu znqr uvf crbcyr
Vfenry hggreyl gb noube uvz; gurersber ur funyy or zl freinag sbe
rire.

28:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gubfr qnlf, gung gur Cuvyvfgvarf tngurerq
gurve nezvrf gbtrgure sbe jnesner, gb svtug jvgu Vfenry. Naq Npuvfu
fnvq hagb Qnivq, Xabj gubh nffherqyl, gung gubh funyg tb bhg jvgu zr
gb onggyr, gubh naq gul zra.

28:2 Naq Qnivq fnvq gb Npuvfu, Fheryl gubh funyg xabj jung gul freinag
pna qb. Naq Npuvfu fnvq gb Qnivq, Gurersber jvyy V znxr gurr xrrcre bs
zvar urnq sbe rire.

28:3 Abj Fnzhry jnf qrnq, naq nyy Vfenry unq ynzragrq uvz, naq ohevrq
uvz va Enznu, rira va uvf bja pvgl. Naq Fnhy unq chg njnl gubfr gung
unq snzvyvne fcvevgf, naq gur jvmneqf, bhg bs gur ynaq.

28:4 Naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure, naq pnzr naq
cvgpurq va Fuharz: naq Fnhy tngurerq nyy Vfenry gbtrgure, naq gurl
cvgpurq va Tvyobn.

28:5 Naq jura Fnhy fnj gur ubfg bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf, ur jnf nsenvq, naq
uvf urneg terngyl gerzoyrq.

28:6 Naq jura Fnhy radhverq bs gur YBEQ, gur YBEQ nafjrerq uvz abg,
arvgure ol qernzf, abe ol Hevz, abe ol cebcurgf.

28:7 Gura fnvq Fnhy hagb uvf freinagf, Frrx zr n jbzna gung ungu n
snzvyvne fcvevg, gung V znl tb gb ure, naq radhver bs ure. Naq uvf
freinagf fnvq gb uvz, Orubyq, gurer vf n jbzna gung ungu n snzvyvne
fcvevg ng Raqbe.

28:8 Naq Fnhy qvfthvfrq uvzfrys, naq chg ba bgure envzrag, naq ur
jrag, naq gjb zra jvgu uvz, naq gurl pnzr gb gur jbzna ol avtug: naq
ur fnvq, V cenl gurr, qvivar hagb zr ol gur snzvyvne fcvevg, naq oevat
zr uvz hc, jubz V funyy anzr hagb gurr.

28:9 Naq gur jbzna fnvq hagb uvz, Orubyq, gubh xabjrfg jung Fnhy ungu
qbar, ubj ur ungu phg bss gubfr gung unir snzvyvne fcvevgf, naq gur
jvmneqf, bhg bs gur ynaq: jurersber gura ynlrfg gubh n faner sbe zl
yvsr, gb pnhfr zr gb qvr?  28:10 Naq Fnhy fjner gb ure ol gur YBEQ,
fnlvat, Nf gur YBEQ yvirgu, gurer funyy ab chavfuzrag unccra gb gurr
sbe guvf guvat.

28:11 Gura fnvq gur jbzna, Jubz funyy V oevat hc hagb gurr? Naq ur
fnvq, Oevat zr hc Fnzhry.

28:12 Naq jura gur jbzna fnj Fnzhry, fur pevrq jvgu n ybhq ibvpr: naq
gur jbzna fcnxr gb Fnhy, fnlvat, Jul unfg gubh qrprvirq zr? sbe gubh
neg Fnhy.

28:13 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb ure, Or abg nsenvq: sbe jung fnjrfg gubh?
Naq gur jbzna fnvq hagb Fnhy, V fnj tbqf nfpraqvat bhg bs gur rnegu.

28:14 Naq ur fnvq hagb ure, Jung sbez vf ur bs? Naq fur fnvq, Na byq
zna pbzrgu hc; naq ur vf pbirerq jvgu n znagyr. Naq Fnhy creprvirq
gung vg jnf Fnzhry, naq ur fgbbcrq jvgu uvf snpr gb gur tebhaq, naq
objrq uvzfrys.

28:15 Naq Fnzhry fnvq gb Fnhy, Jul unfg gubh qvfdhvrgrq zr, gb oevat
zr hc? Naq Fnhy nafjrerq, V nz fber qvfgerffrq; sbe gur Cuvyvfgvarf
znxr jne ntnvafg zr, naq Tbq vf qrcnegrq sebz zr, naq nafjrergu zr ab
zber, arvgure ol cebcurgf, abe ol qernzf: gurersber V unir pnyyrq
gurr, gung gubh znlrfg znxr xabja hagb zr jung V funyy qb.

28:16 Gura fnvq Fnzhry, Jurersber gura qbfg gubh nfx bs zr, frrvat gur
YBEQ vf qrcnegrq sebz gurr, naq vf orpbzr guvar rarzl?  28:17 Naq gur
YBEQ ungu qbar gb uvz, nf ur fcnxr ol zr: sbe gur YBEQ ungu erag gur
xvatqbz bhg bs guvar unaq, naq tvira vg gb gul arvtuobhe, rira gb
Qnivq: 28:18 Orpnhfr gubh borlrqfg abg gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ, abe
rkrphgrqfg uvf svrepr jengu hcba Nznyrx, gurersber ungu gur YBEQ qbar
guvf guvat hagb gurr guvf qnl.

28:19 Zberbire gur YBEQ jvyy nyfb qryvire Vfenry jvgu gurr vagb gur
unaq bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf: naq gb zbeebj funyg gubh naq gul fbaf or jvgu
zr: gur YBEQ nyfb funyy qryvire gur ubfg bs Vfenry vagb gur unaq bs
gur Cuvyvfgvarf.

28:20 Gura Fnhy sryy fgenvtugjnl nyy nybat ba gur rnegu, naq jnf fber
nsenvq, orpnhfr bs gur jbeqf bs Fnzhry: naq gurer jnf ab fgeratgu va
uvz; sbe ur unq rngra ab oernq nyy gur qnl, abe nyy gur avtug.

28:21 Naq gur jbzna pnzr hagb Fnhy, naq fnj gung ur jnf fber gebhoyrq,
naq fnvq hagb uvz, Orubyq, guvar unaqznvq ungu borlrq gul ibvpr, naq V
unir chg zl yvsr va zl unaq, naq unir urnexrarq hagb gul jbeqf juvpu
gubh fcnxrfg hagb zr.

28:22 Abj gurersber, V cenl gurr, urnexra gubh nyfb hagb gur ibvpr bs
guvar unaqznvq, naq yrg zr frg n zbefry bs oernq orsber gurr; naq rng,
gung gubh znlrfg unir fgeratgu, jura gubh tbrfg ba gul jnl.

28:23 Ohg ur ershfrq, naq fnvq, V jvyy abg rng. Ohg uvf freinagf,
gbtrgure jvgu gur jbzna, pbzcryyrq uvz; naq ur urnexrarq hagb gurve
ibvpr. Fb ur nebfr sebz gur rnegu, naq fng hcba gur orq.

28:24 Naq gur jbzna unq n sng pnys va gur ubhfr; naq fur unfgrq, naq
xvyyrq vg, naq gbbx sybhe, naq xarnqrq vg, naq qvq onxr hayrnirarq
oernq gurerbs: 28:25 Naq fur oebhtug vg orsber Fnhy, naq orsber uvf
freinagf; naq gurl qvq rng. Gura gurl ebfr hc, naq jrag njnl gung
avtug.

29:1 Abj gur Cuvyvfgvarf tngurerq gbtrgure nyy gurve nezvrf gb Ncurx:
naq gur Vfenryvgrf cvgpurq ol n sbhagnva juvpu vf va Wrmerry.

29:2 Naq gur ybeqf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf cnffrq ba ol uhaqerqf, naq ol
gubhfnaqf: ohg Qnivq naq uvf zra cnffrq ba va gur ererjneq jvgu
Npuvfu.

29:3 Gura fnvq gur cevaprf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf, Jung qb gurfr Uroerjf
urer?  Naq Npuvfu fnvq hagb gur cevaprf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf, Vf abg
guvf Qnivq, gur freinag bs Fnhy gur xvat bs Vfenry, juvpu ungu orra
jvgu zr gurfr qnlf, be gurfr lrnef, naq V unir sbhaq ab snhyg va uvz
fvapr ur sryy hagb zr hagb guvf qnl?  29:4 Naq gur cevaprf bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf jrer jebgu jvgu uvz; naq gur cevaprf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf
fnvq hagb uvz, Znxr guvf sryybj erghea, gung ur znl tb ntnva gb uvf
cynpr juvpu gubh unfg nccbvagrq uvz, naq yrg uvz abg tb qbja jvgu hf
gb onggyr, yrfg va gur onggyr ur or na nqirefnel gb hf: sbe jurerjvgu
fubhyq ur erpbapvyr uvzfrys hagb uvf znfgre? fubhyq vg abg or jvgu gur
urnqf bs gurfr zra?  29:5 Vf abg guvf Qnivq, bs jubz gurl fnat bar gb
nabgure va qnaprf, fnlvat, Fnhy fyrj uvf gubhfnaqf, naq Qnivq uvf gra
gubhfnaqf?  29:6 Gura Npuvfu pnyyrq Qnivq, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Fheryl,
nf gur YBEQ yvirgu, gubh unfg orra hcevtug, naq gul tbvat bhg naq gul
pbzvat va jvgu zr va gur ubfg vf tbbq va zl fvtug: sbe V unir abg
sbhaq rivy va gurr fvapr gur qnl bs gul pbzvat hagb zr hagb guvf qnl:
arireguryrff gur ybeqf snibhe gurr abg.

29:7 Jurersber abj erghea, naq tb va crnpr, gung gubh qvfcyrnfr abg
gur ybeqf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf.

29:8 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb Npuvfu, Ohg jung unir V qbar? naq jung unfg
gubh sbhaq va gul freinag fb ybat nf V unir orra jvgu gurr hagb guvf
qnl, gung V znl abg tb svtug ntnvafg gur rarzvrf bs zl ybeq gur xvat?
29:9 Naq Npuvfu nafjrerq naq fnvq gb Qnivq, V xabj gung gubh neg tbbq
va zl fvtug, nf na natry bs Tbq: abgjvgufgnaqvat gur cevaprf bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf unir fnvq, Ur funyy abg tb hc jvgu hf gb gur onggyr.

29:10 Jurersber abj evfr hc rneyl va gur zbeavat jvgu gul znfgre'f
freinagf gung ner pbzr jvgu gurr: naq nf fbba nf lr or hc rneyl va gur
zbeavat, naq unir yvtug, qrcneg.

29:11 Fb Qnivq naq uvf zra ebfr hc rneyl gb qrcneg va gur zbeavat, gb
erghea vagb gur ynaq bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf. Naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf jrag hc
gb Wrmerry.

30:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Qnivq naq uvf zra jrer pbzr gb Mvxynt
ba gur guveq qnl, gung gur Nznyrxvgrf unq vainqrq gur fbhgu, naq
Mvxynt, naq fzvggra Mvxynt, naq ohearq vg jvgu sver; 30:2 Naq unq
gnxra gur jbzra pncgvirf, gung jrer gurerva: gurl fyrj abg nal, rvgure
terng be fznyy, ohg pneevrq gurz njnl, naq jrag ba gurve jnl.

30:3 Fb Qnivq naq uvf zra pnzr gb gur pvgl, naq, orubyq, vg jnf ohearq
jvgu sver; naq gurve jvirf, naq gurve fbaf, naq gurve qnhtugref, jrer
gnxra pncgvirf.

30:4 Gura Qnivq naq gur crbcyr gung jrer jvgu uvz yvsgrq hc gurve
ibvpr naq jrcg, hagvy gurl unq ab zber cbjre gb jrrc.

30:5 Naq Qnivq'f gjb jvirf jrer gnxra pncgvirf, Nuvabnz gur
Wrmerryvgrff, naq Novtnvy gur jvsr bs Anony gur Pnezryvgr.

30:6 Naq Qnivq jnf terngyl qvfgerffrq; sbe gur crbcyr fcnxr bs fgbavat
uvz, orpnhfr gur fbhy bs nyy gur crbcyr jnf tevrirq, rirel zna sbe uvf
fbaf naq sbe uvf qnhtugref: ohg Qnivq rapbhentrq uvzfrys va gur YBEQ
uvf Tbq.

30:7 Naq Qnivq fnvq gb Novngune gur cevrfg, Nuvzryrpu'f fba, V cenl
gurr, oevat zr uvgure gur rcubq. Naq Novngune oebhtug guvgure gur
rcubq gb Qnivq.

30:8 Naq Qnivq radhverq ng gur YBEQ, fnlvat, Funyy V chefhr nsgre guvf
gebbc? funyy V biregnxr gurz? Naq ur nafjrerq uvz, Chefhr: sbe gubh
funyg fheryl biregnxr gurz, naq jvgubhg snvy erpbire nyy.

30:9 Fb Qnivq jrag, ur naq gur fvk uhaqerq zra gung jrer jvgu uvz, naq
pnzr gb gur oebbx Orfbe, jurer gubfr gung jrer yrsg oruvaq fgnlrq.

30:10 Ohg Qnivq chefhrq, ur naq sbhe uhaqerq zra: sbe gjb uhaqerq
nobqr oruvaq, juvpu jrer fb snvag gung gurl pbhyq abg tb bire gur
oebbx Orfbe.

30:11 Naq gurl sbhaq na Rtlcgvna va gur svryq, naq oebhtug uvz gb
Qnivq, naq tnir uvz oernq, naq ur qvq rng; naq gurl znqr uvz qevax
jngre; 30:12 Naq gurl tnir uvz n cvrpr bs n pnxr bs svtf, naq gjb
pyhfgref bs envfvaf: naq jura ur unq rngra, uvf fcvevg pnzr ntnva gb
uvz: sbe ur unq rngra ab oernq, abe qehax nal jngre, guerr qnlf naq
guerr avtugf.

30:13 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb uvz, Gb jubz orybatrfg gubh? naq jurapr neg
gubh? Naq ur fnvq, V nz n lbhat zna bs Rtlcg, freinag gb na Nznyrxvgr;
naq zl znfgre yrsg zr, orpnhfr guerr qnlf ntbar V sryy fvpx.

30:14 Jr znqr na vainfvba hcba gur fbhgu bs gur Purerguvgrf, naq hcba
gur pbnfg juvpu orybatrgu gb Whqnu, naq hcba gur fbhgu bs Pnyro; naq
jr ohearq Mvxynt jvgu sver.

30:15 Naq Qnivq fnvq gb uvz, Pnafg gubh oevat zr qbja gb guvf pbzcnal?
Naq ur fnvq, Fjrne hagb zr ol Tbq, gung gubh jvyg arvgure xvyy zr, abe
qryvire zr vagb gur unaqf bs zl znfgre, naq V jvyy oevat gurr qbja gb
guvf pbzcnal.

30:16 Naq jura ur unq oebhtug uvz qbja, orubyq, gurl jrer fcernq
noebnq hcba nyy gur rnegu, rngvat naq qevaxvat, naq qnapvat, orpnhfr
bs nyy gur terng fcbvy gung gurl unq gnxra bhg bs gur ynaq bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf, naq bhg bs gur ynaq bs Whqnu.

30:17 Naq Qnivq fzbgr gurz sebz gur gjvyvtug rira hagb gur riravat bs
gur arkg qnl: naq gurer rfpncrq abg n zna bs gurz, fnir sbhe uhaqerq
lbhat zra, juvpu ebqr hcba pnzryf, naq syrq.

30:18 Naq Qnivq erpbirerq nyy gung gur Nznyrxvgrf unq pneevrq njnl:
naq Qnivq erfphrq uvf gjb jvirf.

30:19 Naq gurer jnf abguvat ynpxvat gb gurz, arvgure fznyy abe terng,
arvgure fbaf abe qnhtugref, arvgure fcbvy, abe nal guvat gung gurl unq
gnxra gb gurz: Qnivq erpbirerq nyy.

30:20 Naq Qnivq gbbx nyy gur sybpxf naq gur ureqf, juvpu gurl qenir
orsber gubfr bgure pnggyr, naq fnvq, Guvf vf Qnivq'f fcbvy.

30:21 Naq Qnivq pnzr gb gur gjb uhaqerq zra, juvpu jrer fb snvag gung
gurl pbhyq abg sbyybj Qnivq, jubz gurl unq znqr nyfb gb novqr ng gur
oebbx Orfbe: naq gurl jrag sbegu gb zrrg Qnivq, naq gb zrrg gur crbcyr
gung jrer jvgu uvz: naq jura Qnivq pnzr arne gb gur crbcyr, ur fnyhgrq
gurz.

30:22 Gura nafjrerq nyy gur jvpxrq zra naq zra bs Oryvny, bs gubfr
gung jrag jvgu Qnivq, naq fnvq, Orpnhfr gurl jrag abg jvgu hf, jr jvyy
abg tvir gurz bhtug bs gur fcbvy gung jr unir erpbirerq, fnir gb rirel
zna uvf jvsr naq uvf puvyqera, gung gurl znl yrnq gurz njnl, naq
qrcneg.

30:23 Gura fnvq Qnivq, Lr funyy abg qb fb, zl oerguera, jvgu gung
juvpu gur YBEQ ungu tvira hf, jub ungu cerfreirq hf, naq qryvirerq gur
pbzcnal gung pnzr ntnvafg hf vagb bhe unaq.

30:24 Sbe jub jvyy urnexra hagb lbh va guvf znggre? ohg nf uvf cneg vf
gung tbrgu qbja gb gur onggyr, fb funyy uvf cneg or gung gneevrgu ol
gur fghss: gurl funyy cneg nyvxr.

30:25 Naq vg jnf fb sebz gung qnl sbejneq, gung ur znqr vg n fgnghgr
naq na beqvanapr sbe Vfenry hagb guvf qnl.

30:26 Naq jura Qnivq pnzr gb Mvxynt, ur frag bs gur fcbvy hagb gur
ryqref bs Whqnu, rira gb uvf sevraqf, fnlvat, Orubyq n cerfrag sbe lbh
bs gur fcbvy bs gur rarzvrf bs gur YBEQ; 30:27 Gb gurz juvpu jrer va
Orgury, naq gb gurz juvpu jrer va fbhgu Enzbgu, naq gb gurz juvpu jrer
va Wnggve, 30:28 Naq gb gurz juvpu jrer va Nebre, naq gb gurz juvpu
jrer va Fvcuzbgu, naq gb gurz juvpu jrer va Rfugrzbn, 30:29 Naq gb
gurz juvpu jrer va Enpuny, naq gb gurz juvpu jrer va gur pvgvrf bs gur
Wrenuzrryvgrf, naq gb gurz juvpu jrer va gur pvgvrf bs gur Xravgrf,
30:30 Naq gb gurz juvpu jrer va Ubeznu, naq gb gurz juvpu jrer va
Pubenfuna, naq gb gurz juvpu jrer va Ngunpu, 30:31 Naq gb gurz juvpu
jrer va Uroeba, naq gb nyy gur cynprf jurer Qnivq uvzfrys naq uvf zra
jrer jbag gb unhag.

31:1 Abj gur Cuvyvfgvarf sbhtug ntnvafg Vfenry: naq gur zra bs Vfenry
syrq sebz orsber gur Cuvyvfgvarf, naq sryy qbja fynva va zbhag Tvyobn.

31:2 Naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf sbyybjrq uneq hcba Fnhy naq hcba uvf fbaf;
naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf fyrj Wbanguna, naq Novanqno, naq Zrypuvfuhn,
Fnhy'f fbaf.

31:3 Naq gur onggyr jrag fber ntnvafg Fnhy, naq gur nepuref uvg uvz;
naq ur jnf fber jbhaqrq bs gur nepuref.

31:4 Gura fnvq Fnhy hagb uvf nezbheornere, Qenj gul fjbeq, naq guehfg
zr guebhtu gurerjvgu; yrfg gurfr hapvephzpvfrq pbzr naq guehfg zr
guebhtu, naq nohfr zr. Ohg uvf nezbheornere jbhyq abg; sbe ur jnf fber
nsenvq. Gurersber Fnhy gbbx n fjbeq, naq sryy hcba vg.

31:5 Naq jura uvf nezbheornere fnj gung Fnhy jnf qrnq, ur sryy
yvxrjvfr hcba uvf fjbeq, naq qvrq jvgu uvz.

31:6 Fb Fnhy qvrq, naq uvf guerr fbaf, naq uvf nezbheornere, naq nyy
uvf zra, gung fnzr qnl gbtrgure.

31:7 Naq jura gur zra bs Vfenry gung jrer ba gur bgure fvqr bs gur
inyyrl, naq gurl gung jrer ba gur bgure fvqr Wbeqna, fnj gung gur zra
bs Vfenry syrq, naq gung Fnhy naq uvf fbaf jrer qrnq, gurl sbefbbx gur
pvgvrf, naq syrq; naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf pnzr naq qjryg va gurz.

31:8 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ba gur zbeebj, jura gur Cuvyvfgvarf pnzr gb
fgevc gur fynva, gung gurl sbhaq Fnhy naq uvf guerr fbaf snyyra va
zbhag Tvyobn.

31:9 Naq gurl phg bss uvf urnq, naq fgevccrq bss uvf nezbhe, naq frag
vagb gur ynaq bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf ebhaq nobhg, gb choyvfu vg va gur
ubhfr bs gurve vqbyf, naq nzbat gur crbcyr.

31:10 Naq gurl chg uvf nezbhe va gur ubhfr bs Nfugnebgu: naq gurl
snfgrarq uvf obql gb gur jnyy bs Orgufuna.

31:11 Naq jura gur vaunovgnagf bs Wnorfutvyrnq urneq bs gung juvpu gur
Cuvyvfgvarf unq qbar gb Fnhy; 31:12 Nyy gur inyvnag zra nebfr, naq
jrag nyy avtug, naq gbbx gur obql bs Fnhy naq gur obqvrf bs uvf fbaf
sebz gur jnyy bs Orgufuna, naq pnzr gb Wnorfu, naq oheag gurz gurer.

31:13 Naq gurl gbbx gurve obarf, naq ohevrq gurz haqre n gerr ng
Wnorfu, naq snfgrq frira qnlf.




Gur Frpbaq Obbx bs Fnzhry

Bgurejvfr Pnyyrq:

Gur Frpbaq Obbx bs gur Xvatf


1:1 Abj vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre gur qrngu bs Fnhy, jura Qnivq jnf
erghearq sebz gur fynhtugre bs gur Nznyrxvgrf, naq Qnivq unq nobqr gjb
qnlf va Mvxynt; 1:2 Vg pnzr rira gb cnff ba gur guveq qnl, gung,
orubyq, n zna pnzr bhg bs gur pnzc sebz Fnhy jvgu uvf pybgurf erag,
naq rnegu hcba uvf urnq: naq fb vg jnf, jura ur pnzr gb Qnivq, gung ur
sryy gb gur rnegu, naq qvq borvfnapr.

1:3 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb uvz, Sebz jurapr pbzrfg gubh? Naq ur fnvq hagb
uvz, Bhg bs gur pnzc bs Vfenry nz V rfpncrq.

1:4 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb uvz, Ubj jrag gur znggre? V cenl gurr, gryy
zr.

Naq ur nafjrerq, Gung gur crbcyr ner syrq sebz gur onggyr, naq znal bs
gur crbcyr nyfb ner snyyra naq qrnq; naq Fnhy naq Wbanguna uvf fba ner
qrnq nyfb.

1:5 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb gur lbhat zna gung gbyq uvz, Ubj xabjrfg gubh
gung Fnhy naq Wbanguna uvf fba or qrnq?  1:6 Naq gur lbhat zna gung
gbyq uvz fnvq, Nf V unccrarq ol punapr hcba zbhag Tvyobn, orubyq, Fnhy
yrnarq hcba uvf fcrne; naq, yb, gur punevbgf naq ubefrzra sbyybjrq
uneq nsgre uvz.

1:7 Naq jura ur ybbxrq oruvaq uvz, ur fnj zr, naq pnyyrq hagb zr. Naq
V nafjrerq, Urer nz V.

1:8 Naq ur fnvq hagb zr, Jub neg gubh? Naq V nafjrerq uvz, V nz na
Nznyrxvgr.

1:9 Ur fnvq hagb zr ntnva, Fgnaq, V cenl gurr, hcba zr, naq fynl zr:
sbe nathvfu vf pbzr hcba zr, orpnhfr zl yvsr vf lrg jubyr va zr.

1:10 Fb V fgbbq hcba uvz, naq fyrj uvz, orpnhfr V jnf fher gung ur
pbhyq abg yvir nsgre gung ur jnf snyyra: naq V gbbx gur pebja gung jnf
hcba uvf urnq, naq gur oenpryrg gung jnf ba uvf nez, naq unir oebhtug
gurz uvgure hagb zl ybeq.

1:11 Gura Qnivq gbbx ubyq ba uvf pybgurf, naq erag gurz; naq yvxrjvfr
nyy gur zra gung jrer jvgu uvz: 1:12 Naq gurl zbhearq, naq jrcg, naq
snfgrq hagvy rira, sbe Fnhy, naq sbe Wbanguna uvf fba, naq sbe gur
crbcyr bs gur YBEQ, naq sbe gur ubhfr bs Vfenry; orpnhfr gurl jrer
snyyra ol gur fjbeq.

1:13 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb gur lbhat zna gung gbyq uvz, Jurapr neg gubh?
Naq ur nafjrerq, V nz gur fba bs n fgenatre, na Nznyrxvgr.

1:14 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb uvz, Ubj jnfg gubh abg nsenvq gb fgergpu
sbegu guvar unaq gb qrfgebl gur YBEQ'f nabvagrq?  1:15 Naq Qnivq
pnyyrq bar bs gur lbhat zra, naq fnvq, Tb arne, naq snyy hcba uvz. Naq
ur fzbgr uvz gung ur qvrq.

1:16 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb uvz, Gul oybbq or hcba gul urnq; sbe gul
zbhgu ungu grfgvsvrq ntnvafg gurr, fnlvat, V unir fynva gur YBEQ'f
nabvagrq.

1:17 Naq Qnivq ynzragrq jvgu guvf ynzragngvba bire Fnhy naq bire
Wbanguna uvf fba: 1:18 (Nyfb ur onqr gurz grnpu gur puvyqera bs Whqnu
gur hfr bs gur obj: orubyq, vg vf jevggra va gur obbx bs Wnfure.)
1:19 Gur ornhgl bs Vfenry vf fynva hcba gul uvtu cynprf: ubj ner gur
zvtugl snyyra!  1:20 Gryy vg abg va Tngu, choyvfu vg abg va gur
fgerrgf bs Nfxryba; yrfg gur qnhtugref bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf erwbvpr,
yrfg gur qnhtugref bs gur hapvephzpvfrq gevhzcu.

1:21 Lr zbhagnvaf bs Tvyobn, yrg gurer or ab qrj, arvgure yrg gurer or
enva, hcba lbh, abe svryqf bs bssrevatf: sbe gurer gur fuvryq bs gur
zvtugl vf ivyryl pnfg njnl, gur fuvryq bs Fnhy, nf gubhtu ur unq abg
orra nabvagrq jvgu bvy.

1:22 Sebz gur oybbq bs gur fynva, sebz gur sng bs gur zvtugl, gur obj
bs Wbanguna ghearq abg onpx, naq gur fjbeq bs Fnhy erghearq abg rzcgl.

1:23 Fnhy naq Wbanguna jrer ybiryl naq cyrnfnag va gurve yvirf, naq va
gurve qrngu gurl jrer abg qvivqrq: gurl jrer fjvsgre guna rntyrf, gurl
jrer fgebatre guna yvbaf.

1:24 Lr qnhtugref bs Vfenry, jrrc bire Fnhy, jub pybgurq lbh va
fpneyrg, jvgu bgure qryvtugf, jub chg ba beanzragf bs tbyq hcba lbhe
nccnery.

1:25 Ubj ner gur zvtugl snyyra va gur zvqfg bs gur onggyr! B Wbanguna,
gubh jnfg fynva va guvar uvtu cynprf.

1:26 V nz qvfgerffrq sbe gurr, zl oebgure Wbanguna: irel cyrnfnag unfg
gubh orra hagb zr: gul ybir gb zr jnf jbaqreshy, cnffvat gur ybir bs
jbzra.

1:27 Ubj ner gur zvtugl snyyra, naq gur jrncbaf bs jne crevfurq!  2:1
Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre guvf, gung Qnivq radhverq bs gur YBEQ,
fnlvat, Funyy V tb hc vagb nal bs gur pvgvrf bs Whqnu? Naq gur YBEQ
fnvq hagb uvz, Tb hc. Naq Qnivq fnvq, Juvgure funyy V tb hc? Naq ur
fnvq, Hagb Uroeba.

2:2 Fb Qnivq jrag hc guvgure, naq uvf gjb jvirf nyfb, Nuvabnz gur
Wrmerryvgrff, naq Novtnvy Anony'f jvsr gur Pnezryvgr.

2:3 Naq uvf zra gung jrer jvgu uvz qvq Qnivq oevat hc, rirel zna jvgu
uvf ubhfrubyq: naq gurl qjryg va gur pvgvrf bs Uroeba.

2:4 Naq gur zra bs Whqnu pnzr, naq gurer gurl nabvagrq Qnivq xvat bire
gur ubhfr bs Whqnu. Naq gurl gbyq Qnivq, fnlvat, Gung gur zra bs
Wnorfutvyrnq jrer gurl gung ohevrq Fnhy.

2:5 Naq Qnivq frag zrffratref hagb gur zra bs Wnorfutvyrnq, naq fnvq
hagb gurz, Oyrffrq or lr bs gur YBEQ, gung lr unir furjrq guvf
xvaqarff hagb lbhe ybeq, rira hagb Fnhy, naq unir ohevrq uvz.

2:6 Naq abj gur YBEQ furj xvaqarff naq gehgu hagb lbh: naq V nyfb jvyy
erdhvgr lbh guvf xvaqarff, orpnhfr lr unir qbar guvf guvat.

2:7 Gurersber abj yrg lbhe unaqf or fgeratgurarq, naq or lr inyvnag:
sbe lbhe znfgre Fnhy vf qrnq, naq nyfb gur ubhfr bs Whqnu unir
nabvagrq zr xvat bire gurz.

2:8 Ohg Noare gur fba bs Are, pncgnva bs Fnhy'f ubfg, gbbx Vfuobfurgu
gur fba bs Fnhy, naq oebhtug uvz bire gb Znunanvz; 2:9 Naq znqr uvz
xvat bire Tvyrnq, naq bire gur Nfuhevgrf, naq bire Wrmerry, naq bire
Rcuenvz, naq bire Orawnzva, naq bire nyy Vfenry.

2:10 Vfuobfurgu Fnhy'f fba jnf sbegl lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta
bire Vfenry, naq ervtarq gjb lrnef. Ohg gur ubhfr bs Whqnu sbyybjrq
Qnivq.

2:11 Naq gur gvzr gung Qnivq jnf xvat va Uroeba bire gur ubhfr bs
Whqnu jnf frira lrnef naq fvk zbaguf.

2:12 Naq Noare gur fba bs Are, naq gur freinagf bs Vfuobfurgu gur fba
bs Fnhy, jrag bhg sebz Znunanvz gb Tvorba.

2:13 Naq Wbno gur fba bs Mrehvnu, naq gur freinagf bs Qnivq, jrag bhg,
naq zrg gbtrgure ol gur cbby bs Tvorba: naq gurl fng qbja, gur bar ba
gur bar fvqr bs gur cbby, naq gur bgure ba gur bgure fvqr bs gur cbby.

2:14 Naq Noare fnvq gb Wbno, Yrg gur lbhat zra abj nevfr, naq cynl
orsber hf. Naq Wbno fnvq, Yrg gurz nevfr.

2:15 Gura gurer nebfr naq jrag bire ol ahzore gjryir bs Orawnzva,
juvpu cregnvarq gb Vfuobfurgu gur fba bs Fnhy, naq gjryir bs gur
freinagf bs Qnivq.

2:16 Naq gurl pnhtug rirel bar uvf sryybj ol gur urnq, naq guehfg uvf
fjbeq va uvf sryybj'f fvqr; fb gurl sryy qbja gbtrgure: jurersber gung
cynpr jnf pnyyrq Uryxnguunmmhevz, juvpu vf va Tvorba.

2:17 Naq gurer jnf n irel fber onggyr gung qnl; naq Noare jnf orngra,
naq gur zra bs Vfenry, orsber gur freinagf bs Qnivq.

2:18 Naq gurer jrer guerr fbaf bs Mrehvnu gurer, Wbno, naq Novfunv,
naq Nfnury: naq Nfnury jnf nf yvtug bs sbbg nf n jvyq ebr.

2:19 Naq Nfnury chefhrq nsgre Noare; naq va tbvat ur ghearq abg gb gur
evtug unaq abe gb gur yrsg sebz sbyybjvat Noare.

2:20 Gura Noare ybbxrq oruvaq uvz, naq fnvq, Neg gubh Nfnury? Naq ur
nafjrerq, V nz.

2:21 Naq Noare fnvq gb uvz, Ghea gurr nfvqr gb gul evtug unaq be gb
gul yrsg, naq ynl gurr ubyq ba bar bs gur lbhat zra, naq gnxr gurr uvf
nezbhe.

Ohg Nfnury jbhyq abg ghea nfvqr sebz sbyybjvat bs uvz.

2:22 Naq Noare fnvq ntnva gb Nfnury, Ghea gurr nfvqr sebz sbyybjvat
zr: jurersber fubhyq V fzvgr gurr gb gur tebhaq? ubj gura fubhyq V
ubyq hc zl snpr gb Wbno gul oebgure?  2:23 Ubjorvg ur ershfrq gb ghea
nfvqr: jurersber Noare jvgu gur uvaqre raq bs gur fcrne fzbgr uvz
haqre gur svsgu evo, gung gur fcrne pnzr bhg oruvaq uvz; naq ur sryy
qbja gurer, naq qvrq va gur fnzr cynpr: naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung nf
znal nf pnzr gb gur cynpr jurer Nfnury sryy qbja naq qvrq fgbbq fgvyy.

2:24 Wbno nyfb naq Novfunv chefhrq nsgre Noare: naq gur fha jrag qbja
jura gurl jrer pbzr gb gur uvyy bs Nzznu, gung yvrgu orsber Tvnu ol
gur jnl bs gur jvyqrearff bs Tvorba.

2:25 Naq gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure nsgre
Noare, naq orpnzr bar gebbc, naq fgbbq ba gur gbc bs na uvyy.

2:26 Gura Noare pnyyrq gb Wbno, naq fnvq, Funyy gur fjbeq qribhe sbe
rire?  xabjrfg gubh abg gung vg jvyy or ovggrearff va gur ynggre raq?
ubj ybat funyy vg or gura, rer gubh ovq gur crbcyr erghea sebz
sbyybjvat gurve oerguera?  2:27 Naq Wbno fnvq, Nf Tbq yvirgu, hayrff
gubh unqfg fcbxra, fheryl gura va gur zbeavat gur crbcyr unq tbar hc
rirel bar sebz sbyybjvat uvf oebgure.

2:28 Fb Wbno oyrj n gehzcrg, naq nyy gur crbcyr fgbbq fgvyy, naq
chefhrq nsgre Vfenry ab zber, arvgure sbhtug gurl nal zber.

2:29 Naq Noare naq uvf zra jnyxrq nyy gung avtug guebhtu gur cynva,
naq cnffrq bire Wbeqna, naq jrag guebhtu nyy Ovgueba, naq gurl pnzr gb
Znunanvz.

2:30 Naq Wbno erghearq sebz sbyybjvat Noare: naq jura ur unq tngurerq
nyy gur crbcyr gbtrgure, gurer ynpxrq bs Qnivq'f freinagf avargrra zra
naq Nfnury.

2:31 Ohg gur freinagf bs Qnivq unq fzvggra bs Orawnzva, naq bs Noare'f
zra, fb gung guerr uhaqerq naq guerrfpber zra qvrq.

2:32 Naq gurl gbbx hc Nfnury, naq ohevrq uvz va gur frchypuer bs uvf
sngure, juvpu jnf va Orguyrurz. Naq Wbno naq uvf zra jrag nyy avtug,
naq gurl pnzr gb Uroeba ng oernx bs qnl.

3:1 Abj gurer jnf ybat jne orgjrra gur ubhfr bs Fnhy naq gur ubhfr bs
Qnivq: ohg Qnivq jnkrq fgebatre naq fgebatre, naq gur ubhfr bs Fnhy
jnkrq jrnxre naq jrnxre.

3:2 Naq hagb Qnivq jrer fbaf obea va Uroeba: naq uvf svefgobea jnf
Nzaba, bs Nuvabnz gur Wrmerryvgrff; 3:3 Naq uvf frpbaq, Puvyrno, bs
Novtnvy gur jvsr bs Anony gur Pnezryvgr; naq gur guveq, Nofnybz gur
fba bs Znnpnu gur qnhtugre bs Gnyznv xvat bs Trfuhe; 3:4 Naq gur
sbhegu, Nqbavwnu gur fba bs Unttvgu; naq gur svsgu, Furcungvnu gur fba
bs Novgny; 3:5 Naq gur fvkgu, Vguernz, ol Rtynu Qnivq'f jvsr. Gurfr
jrer obea gb Qnivq va Uroeba.

3:6 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, juvyr gurer jnf jne orgjrra gur ubhfr bs Fnhy
naq gur ubhfr bs Qnivq, gung Noare znqr uvzfrys fgebat sbe gur ubhfr
bs Fnhy.

3:7 Naq Fnhy unq n pbaphovar, jubfr anzr jnf Evmcnu, gur qnhtugre bs
Nvnu: naq Vfuobfurgu fnvq gb Noare, Jurersber unfg gubh tbar va hagb
zl sngure'f pbaphovar?  3:8 Gura jnf Noare irel jebgu sbe gur jbeqf bs
Vfuobfurgu, naq fnvq, Nz V n qbt'f urnq, juvpu ntnvafg Whqnu qb furj
xvaqarff guvf qnl hagb gur ubhfr bs Fnhy gul sngure, gb uvf oerguera,
naq gb uvf sevraqf, naq unir abg qryvirerq gurr vagb gur unaq bs
Qnivq, gung gubh punetrfg zr gb qnl jvgu n snhyg pbapreavat guvf
jbzna?  3:9 Fb qb Tbq gb Noare, naq zber nyfb, rkprcg, nf gur YBEQ
ungu fjbea gb Qnivq, rira fb V qb gb uvz; 3:10 Gb genafyngr gur
xvatqbz sebz gur ubhfr bs Fnhy, naq gb frg hc gur guebar bs Qnivq bire
Vfenry naq bire Whqnu, sebz Qna rira gb Orrefuron.

3:11 Naq ur pbhyq abg nafjre Noare n jbeq ntnva, orpnhfr ur srnerq
uvz.

3:12 Naq Noare frag zrffratref gb Qnivq ba uvf orunys, fnlvat, Jubfr
vf gur ynaq? fnlvat nyfb, Znxr gul yrnthr jvgu zr, naq, orubyq, zl
unaq funyy or jvgu gurr, gb oevat nobhg nyy Vfenry hagb gurr.

3:13 Naq ur fnvq, Jryy; V jvyy znxr n yrnthr jvgu gurr: ohg bar guvat
V erdhver bs gurr, gung vf, Gubh funyg abg frr zl snpr, rkprcg gubh
svefg oevat Zvpuny Fnhy'f qnhtugre, jura gubh pbzrfg gb frr zl snpr.

3:14 Naq Qnivq frag zrffratref gb Vfuobfurgu Fnhy'f fba, fnlvat,
Qryvire zr zl jvsr Zvpuny, juvpu V rfcbhfrq gb zr sbe na uhaqerq
sberfxvaf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf.

3:15 Naq Vfuobfurgu frag, naq gbbx ure sebz ure uhfonaq, rira sebz
Cunygvry gur fba bs Ynvfu.

3:16 Naq ure uhfonaq jrag jvgu ure nybat jrrcvat oruvaq ure gb
Onuhevz.

Gura fnvq Noare hagb uvz, Tb, erghea. Naq ur erghearq.

3:17 Naq Noare unq pbzzhavpngvba jvgu gur ryqref bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Lr
fbhtug sbe Qnivq va gvzrf cnfg gb or xvat bire lbh: 3:18 Abj gura qb
vg: sbe gur YBEQ ungu fcbxra bs Qnivq, fnlvat, Ol gur unaq bs zl
freinag Qnivq V jvyy fnir zl crbcyr Vfenry bhg bs gur unaq bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf, naq bhg bs gur unaq bs nyy gurve rarzvrf.

3:19 Naq Noare nyfb fcnxr va gur rnef bs Orawnzva: naq Noare jrag nyfb
gb fcrnx va gur rnef bs Qnivq va Uroeba nyy gung frrzrq tbbq gb
Vfenry, naq gung frrzrq tbbq gb gur jubyr ubhfr bs Orawnzva.

3:20 Fb Noare pnzr gb Qnivq gb Uroeba, naq gjragl zra jvgu uvz. Naq
Qnivq znqr Noare naq gur zra gung jrer jvgu uvz n srnfg.

3:21 Naq Noare fnvq hagb Qnivq, V jvyy nevfr naq tb, naq jvyy tngure
nyy Vfenry hagb zl ybeq gur xvat, gung gurl znl znxr n yrnthr jvgu
gurr, naq gung gubh znlrfg ervta bire nyy gung guvar urneg qrfvergu.
Naq Qnivq frag Noare njnl; naq ur jrag va crnpr.

3:22 Naq, orubyq, gur freinagf bs Qnivq naq Wbno pnzr sebz chefhvat n
gebbc, naq oebhtug va n terng fcbvy jvgu gurz: ohg Noare jnf abg jvgu
Qnivq va Uroeba; sbe ur unq frag uvz njnl, naq ur jnf tbar va crnpr.

3:23 Jura Wbno naq nyy gur ubfg gung jnf jvgu uvz jrer pbzr, gurl gbyq
Wbno, fnlvat, Noare gur fba bs Are pnzr gb gur xvat, naq ur ungu frag
uvz njnl, naq ur vf tbar va crnpr.

3:24 Gura Wbno pnzr gb gur xvat, naq fnvq, Jung unfg gubh qbar?
orubyq, Noare pnzr hagb gurr; jul vf vg gung gubh unfg frag uvz njnl,
naq ur vf dhvgr tbar?  3:25 Gubh xabjrfg Noare gur fba bs Are, gung ur
pnzr gb qrprvir gurr, naq gb xabj gul tbvat bhg naq gul pbzvat va, naq
gb xabj nyy gung gubh qbrfg.

3:26 Naq jura Wbno jnf pbzr bhg sebz Qnivq, ur frag zrffratref nsgre
Noare, juvpu oebhtug uvz ntnva sebz gur jryy bs Fvenu: ohg Qnivq xarj
vg abg.

3:27 Naq jura Noare jnf erghearq gb Uroeba, Wbno gbbx uvz nfvqr va gur
tngr gb fcrnx jvgu uvz dhvrgyl, naq fzbgr uvz gurer haqre gur svsgu
evo, gung ur qvrq, sbe gur oybbq bs Nfnury uvf oebgure.

3:28 Naq nsgrejneq jura Qnivq urneq vg, ur fnvq, V naq zl xvatqbz ner
thvygyrff orsber gur YBEQ sbe rire sebz gur oybbq bs Noare gur fba bs
Are: 3:29 Yrg vg erfg ba gur urnq bs Wbno, naq ba nyy uvf sngure'f
ubhfr; naq yrg gurer abg snvy sebz gur ubhfr bs Wbno bar gung ungu na
vffhr, be gung vf n yrcre, be gung yrnargu ba n fgnss, be gung snyyrgu
ba gur fjbeq, be gung ynpxrgu oernq.

3:30 Fb Wbno, naq Novfunv uvf oebgure fyrj Noare, orpnhfr ur unq fynva
gurve oebgure Nfnury ng Tvorba va gur onggyr.

3:31 Naq Qnivq fnvq gb Wbno, naq gb nyy gur crbcyr gung jrer jvgu uvz,
Eraq lbhe pybgurf, naq tveq lbh jvgu fnpxpybgu, naq zbhea orsber
Noare. Naq xvat Qnivq uvzfrys sbyybjrq gur ovre.

3:32 Naq gurl ohevrq Noare va Uroeba: naq gur xvat yvsgrq hc uvf
ibvpr, naq jrcg ng gur tenir bs Noare; naq nyy gur crbcyr jrcg.

3:33 Naq gur xvat ynzragrq bire Noare, naq fnvq, Qvrq Noare nf n sbby
qvrgu?  3:34 Gul unaqf jrer abg obhaq, abe gul srrg chg vagb srggref:
nf n zna snyyrgu orsber jvpxrq zra, fb sryyrfg gubh. Naq nyy gur
crbcyr jrcg ntnva bire uvz.

3:35 Naq jura nyy gur crbcyr pnzr gb pnhfr Qnivq gb rng zrng juvyr vg
jnf lrg qnl, Qnivq fjner, fnlvat, Fb qb Tbq gb zr, naq zber nyfb, vs V
gnfgr oernq, be bhtug ryfr, gvyy gur fha or qbja.

3:36 Naq nyy gur crbcyr gbbx abgvpr bs vg, naq vg cyrnfrq gurz: nf
jungfbrire gur xvat qvq cyrnfrq nyy gur crbcyr.

3:37 Sbe nyy gur crbcyr naq nyy Vfenry haqrefgbbq gung qnl gung vg jnf
abg bs gur xvat gb fynl Noare gur fba bs Are.

3:38 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb uvf freinagf, Xabj lr abg gung gurer vf n
cevapr naq n terng zna snyyra guvf qnl va Vfenry?  3:39 Naq V nz guvf
qnl jrnx, gubhtu nabvagrq xvat; naq gurfr zra gur fbaf bs Mrehvnu or
gbb uneq sbe zr: gur YBEQ funyy erjneq gur qbre bs rivy nppbeqvat gb
uvf jvpxrqarff.

4:1 Naq jura Fnhy'f fba urneq gung Noare jnf qrnq va Uroeba, uvf unaqf
jrer srroyr, naq nyy gur Vfenryvgrf jrer gebhoyrq.

4:2 Naq Fnhy'f fba unq gjb zra gung jrer pncgnvaf bs onaqf: gur anzr
bs gur bar jnf Onnanu, naq gur anzr bs gur bgure Erpuno, gur fbaf bs
Evzzba n Orrebguvgr, bs gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva: (sbe Orrebgu nyfb
jnf erpxbarq gb Orawnzva.

4:3 Naq gur Orrebguvgrf syrq gb Tvggnvz, naq jrer fbwbhearef gurer
hagvy guvf qnl.)  4:4 Naq Wbanguna, Fnhy'f fba, unq n fba gung jnf
ynzr bs uvf srrg. Ur jnf svir lrnef byq jura gur gvqvatf pnzr bs Fnhy
naq Wbanguna bhg bs Wrmerry, naq uvf ahefr gbbx uvz hc, naq syrq: naq
vg pnzr gb cnff, nf fur znqr unfgr gb syrr, gung ur sryy, naq orpnzr
ynzr. Naq uvf anzr jnf Zrcuvobfurgu.

4:5 Naq gur fbaf bs Evzzba gur Orrebguvgr, Erpuno naq Onnanu, jrag,
naq pnzr nobhg gur urng bs gur qnl gb gur ubhfr bs Vfuobfurgu, jub ynl
ba n orq ng abba.

4:6 Naq gurl pnzr guvgure vagb gur zvqfg bs gur ubhfr, nf gubhtu gurl
jbhyq unir srgpurq jurng; naq gurl fzbgr uvz haqre gur svsgu evo: naq
Erpuno naq Onnanu uvf oebgure rfpncrq.

4:7 Sbe jura gurl pnzr vagb gur ubhfr, ur ynl ba uvf orq va uvf
orqpunzore, naq gurl fzbgr uvz, naq fyrj uvz, naq orurnqrq uvz, naq
gbbx uvf urnq, naq tng gurz njnl guebhtu gur cynva nyy avtug.

4:8 Naq gurl oebhtug gur urnq bs Vfuobfurgu hagb Qnivq gb Uroeba, naq
fnvq gb gur xvat, Orubyq gur urnq bs Vfuobfurgu gur fba bs Fnhy guvar
rarzl, juvpu fbhtug gul yvsr; naq gur YBEQ ungu niratrq zl ybeq gur
xvat guvf qnl bs Fnhy, naq bs uvf frrq.

4:9 Naq Qnivq nafjrerq Erpuno naq Onnanu uvf oebgure, gur fbaf bs
Evzzba gur Orrebguvgr, naq fnvq hagb gurz, Nf gur YBEQ yvirgu, jub
ungu erqrrzrq zl fbhy bhg bs nyy nqirefvgl, 4:10 Jura bar gbyq zr,
fnlvat, Orubyq, Fnhy vf qrnq, guvaxvat gb unir oebhtug tbbq gvqvatf, V
gbbx ubyq bs uvz, naq fyrj uvz va Mvxynt, jub gubhtug gung V jbhyq
unir tvira uvz n erjneq sbe uvf gvqvatf: 4:11 Ubj zhpu zber, jura
jvpxrq zra unir fynva n evtugrbhf crefba va uvf bja ubhfr hcba uvf
orq? funyy V abg gurersber abj erdhver uvf oybbq bs lbhe unaq, naq
gnxr lbh njnl sebz gur rnegu?  4:12 Naq Qnivq pbzznaqrq uvf lbhat zra,
naq gurl fyrj gurz, naq phg bss gurve unaqf naq gurve srrg, naq unatrq
gurz hc bire gur cbby va Uroeba. Ohg gurl gbbx gur urnq bs Vfuobfurgu,
naq ohevrq vg va gur frchypuer bs Noare va Uroeba.

5:1 Gura pnzr nyy gur gevorf bs Vfenry gb Qnivq hagb Uroeba, naq
fcnxr, fnlvat, Orubyq, jr ner gul obar naq gul syrfu.

5:2 Nyfb va gvzr cnfg, jura Fnhy jnf xvat bire hf, gubh jnfg ur gung
yrqqrfg bhg naq oebhtugrfg va Vfenry: naq gur YBEQ fnvq gb gurr, Gubh
funyg srrq zl crbcyr Vfenry, naq gubh funyg or n pncgnva bire Vfenry.

5:3 Fb nyy gur ryqref bs Vfenry pnzr gb gur xvat gb Uroeba; naq xvat
Qnivq znqr n yrnthr jvgu gurz va Uroeba orsber gur YBEQ: naq gurl
nabvagrq Qnivq xvat bire Vfenry.

5:4 Qnivq jnf guvegl lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq ur ervtarq
sbegl lrnef.

5:5 Va Uroeba ur ervtarq bire Whqnu frira lrnef naq fvk zbaguf: naq va
Wrehfnyrz ur ervtarq guvegl naq guerr lrnef bire nyy Vfenry naq Whqnu.

5:6 Naq gur xvat naq uvf zra jrag gb Wrehfnyrz hagb gur Wrohfvgrf, gur
vaunovgnagf bs gur ynaq: juvpu fcnxr hagb Qnivq, fnlvat, Rkprcg gubh
gnxr njnl gur oyvaq naq gur ynzr, gubh funyg abg pbzr va uvgure:
guvaxvat, Qnivq pnaabg pbzr va uvgure.

5:7 Arireguryrff Qnivq gbbx gur fgebat ubyq bs Mvba: gur fnzr vf gur
pvgl bs Qnivq.

5:8 Naq Qnivq fnvq ba gung qnl, Jubfbrire trggrgu hc gb gur thggre,
naq fzvgrgu gur Wrohfvgrf, naq gur ynzr naq gur oyvaq gung ner ungrq
bs Qnivq'f fbhy, ur funyy or puvrs naq pncgnva. Jurersber gurl fnvq,
Gur oyvaq naq gur ynzr funyy abg pbzr vagb gur ubhfr.

5:9 Fb Qnivq qjryg va gur sbeg, naq pnyyrq vg gur pvgl bs Qnivq. Naq
Qnivq ohvyg ebhaq nobhg sebz Zvyyb naq vajneq.

5:10 Naq Qnivq jrag ba, naq terj terng, naq gur YBEQ Tbq bs ubfgf jnf
jvgu uvz.

5:11 Naq Uvenz xvat bs Gler frag zrffratref gb Qnivq, naq prqne gerrf,
naq pnecragref, naq znfbaf: naq gurl ohvyg Qnivq na ubhfr.

5:12 Naq Qnivq creprvirq gung gur YBEQ unq rfgnoyvfurq uvz xvat bire
Vfenry, naq gung ur unq rknygrq uvf xvatqbz sbe uvf crbcyr Vfenry'f
fnxr.

5:13 Naq Qnivq gbbx uvz zber pbaphovarf naq jvirf bhg bs Wrehfnyrz,
nsgre ur jnf pbzr sebz Uroeba: naq gurer jrer lrg fbaf naq qnhtugref
obea gb Qnivq.

5:14 Naq gurfr or gur anzrf bs gubfr gung jrer obea hagb uvz va
Wrehfnyrz; Funzzhnu, naq Fubono, naq Anguna, naq Fbybzba, 5:15 Voune
nyfb, naq Ryvfuhn, naq Arcurt, naq Wncuvn, 5:16 Naq Ryvfunzn, naq
Ryvnqn, naq Ryvcunyrg.

5:17 Ohg jura gur Cuvyvfgvarf urneq gung gurl unq nabvagrq Qnivq xvat
bire Vfenry, nyy gur Cuvyvfgvarf pnzr hc gb frrx Qnivq; naq Qnivq
urneq bs vg, naq jrag qbja gb gur ubyq.

5:18 Gur Cuvyvfgvarf nyfb pnzr naq fcernq gurzfryirf va gur inyyrl bs
Ercunvz.

5:19 Naq Qnivq radhverq bs gur YBEQ, fnlvat, Funyy V tb hc gb gur
Cuvyvfgvarf? jvyg gubh qryvire gurz vagb zvar unaq? Naq gur YBEQ fnvq
hagb Qnivq, Tb hc: sbe V jvyy qbhogyrff qryvire gur Cuvyvfgvarf vagb
guvar unaq.

5:20 Naq Qnivq pnzr gb Onnycrenmvz, naq Qnivq fzbgr gurz gurer, naq
fnvq, Gur YBEQ ungu oebxra sbegu hcba zvar rarzvrf orsber zr, nf gur
oernpu bs jngref. Gurersber ur pnyyrq gur anzr bs gung cynpr
Onnycrenmvz.

5:21 Naq gurer gurl yrsg gurve vzntrf, naq Qnivq naq uvf zra ohearq
gurz.

5:22 Naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf pnzr hc lrg ntnva, naq fcernq gurzfryirf va
gur inyyrl bs Ercunvz.

5:23 Naq jura Qnivq radhverq bs gur YBEQ, ur fnvq, Gubh funyg abg tb
hc; ohg srgpu n pbzcnff oruvaq gurz, naq pbzr hcba gurz bire ntnvafg
gur zhyoreel gerrf.

5:24 Naq yrg vg or, jura gubh urnerfg gur fbhaq bs n tbvat va gur gbcf
bs gur zhyoreel gerrf, gung gura gubh funyg orfgve gulfrys: sbe gura
funyy gur YBEQ tb bhg orsber gurr, gb fzvgr gur ubfg bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf.

5:25 Naq Qnivq qvq fb, nf gur YBEQ unq pbzznaqrq uvz; naq fzbgr gur
Cuvyvfgvarf sebz Tron hagvy gubh pbzr gb Tnmre.

6:1 Ntnva, Qnivq tngurerq gbtrgure nyy gur pubfra zra bs Vfenry,
guvegl gubhfnaq.

6:2 Naq Qnivq nebfr, naq jrag jvgu nyy gur crbcyr gung jrer jvgu uvz
sebz Onnyr bs Whqnu, gb oevat hc sebz gurapr gur nex bs Tbq, jubfr
anzr vf pnyyrq ol gur anzr bs gur YBEQ bs ubfgf gung qjryyrgu orgjrra
gur purehovzf.

6:3 Naq gurl frg gur nex bs Tbq hcba n arj pneg, naq oebhtug vg bhg bs
gur ubhfr bs Novanqno gung jnf va Tvornu: naq Hmmnu naq Nuvb, gur fbaf
bs Novanqno, qenir gur arj pneg.

6:4 Naq gurl oebhtug vg bhg bs gur ubhfr bs Novanqno juvpu jnf ng
Tvornu, nppbzcnalvat gur nex bs Tbq: naq Nuvb jrag orsber gur nex.

6:5 Naq Qnivq naq nyy gur ubhfr bs Vfenry cynlrq orsber gur YBEQ ba
nyy znaare bs vafgehzragf znqr bs sve jbbq, rira ba unecf, naq ba
cfnygrevrf, naq ba gvzoeryf, naq ba pbeargf, naq ba plzonyf.

6:6 Naq jura gurl pnzr gb Anpuba'f guerfuvatsybbe, Hmmnu chg sbegu uvf
unaq gb gur nex bs Tbq, naq gbbx ubyq bs vg; sbe gur bkra fubbx vg.

6:7 Naq gur natre bs gur YBEQ jnf xvaqyrq ntnvafg Hmmnu; naq Tbq fzbgr
uvz gurer sbe uvf reebe; naq gurer ur qvrq ol gur nex bs Tbq.

6:8 Naq Qnivq jnf qvfcyrnfrq, orpnhfr gur YBEQ unq znqr n oernpu hcba
Hmmnu: naq ur pnyyrq gur anzr bs gur cynpr Crermhmmnu gb guvf qnl.

6:9 Naq Qnivq jnf nsenvq bs gur YBEQ gung qnl, naq fnvq, Ubj funyy gur
nex bs gur YBEQ pbzr gb zr?  6:10 Fb Qnivq jbhyq abg erzbir gur nex bs
gur YBEQ hagb uvz vagb gur pvgl bs Qnivq: ohg Qnivq pneevrq vg nfvqr
vagb gur ubhfr bs Borqrqbz gur Tvggvgr.

6:11 Naq gur nex bs gur YBEQ pbagvahrq va gur ubhfr bs Borqrqbz gur
Tvggvgr guerr zbaguf: naq gur YBEQ oyrffrq Borqrqbz, naq nyy uvf
ubhfrubyq.

6:12 Naq vg jnf gbyq xvat Qnivq, fnlvat, Gur YBEQ ungu oyrffrq gur
ubhfr bs Borqrqbz, naq nyy gung cregnvargu hagb uvz, orpnhfr bs gur
nex bs Tbq. Fb Qnivq jrag naq oebhtug hc gur nex bs Tbq sebz gur ubhfr
bs Borqrqbz vagb gur pvgl bs Qnivq jvgu tynqarff.

6:13 Naq vg jnf fb, gung jura gurl gung oner gur nex bs gur YBEQ unq
tbar fvk cnprf, ur fnpevsvprq bkra naq sngyvatf.

6:14 Naq Qnivq qnaprq orsber gur YBEQ jvgu nyy uvf zvtug; naq Qnivq
jnf tveqrq jvgu n yvara rcubq.

6:15 Fb Qnivq naq nyy gur ubhfr bs Vfenry oebhtug hc gur nex bs gur
YBEQ jvgu fubhgvat, naq jvgu gur fbhaq bs gur gehzcrg.

6:16 Naq nf gur nex bs gur YBEQ pnzr vagb gur pvgl bs Qnivq, Zvpuny
Fnhy'f qnhtugre ybbxrq guebhtu n jvaqbj, naq fnj xvat Qnivq yrncvat
naq qnapvat orsber gur YBEQ; naq fur qrfcvfrq uvz va ure urneg.

6:17 Naq gurl oebhtug va gur nex bs gur YBEQ, naq frg vg va uvf cynpr,
va gur zvqfg bs gur gnoreanpyr gung Qnivq unq cvgpurq sbe vg: naq
Qnivq bssrerq oheag bssrevatf naq crnpr bssrevatf orsber gur YBEQ.

6:18 Naq nf fbba nf Qnivq unq znqr na raq bs bssrevat oheag bssrevatf
naq crnpr bssrevatf, ur oyrffrq gur crbcyr va gur anzr bs gur YBEQ bs
ubfgf.

6:19 Naq ur qrnyg nzbat nyy gur crbcyr, rira nzbat gur jubyr zhygvghqr
bs Vfenry, nf jryy gb gur jbzra nf zra, gb rirel bar n pnxr bs oernq,
naq n tbbq cvrpr bs syrfu, naq n syntba bs jvar. Fb nyy gur crbcyr
qrcnegrq rirel bar gb uvf ubhfr.

6:20 Gura Qnivq erghearq gb oyrff uvf ubhfrubyq. Naq Zvpuny gur
qnhtugre bs Fnhy pnzr bhg gb zrrg Qnivq, naq fnvq, Ubj tybevbhf jnf
gur xvat bs Vfenry gb qnl, jub hapbirerq uvzfrys gb qnl va gur rlrf bs
gur unaqznvqf bs uvf freinagf, nf bar bs gur inva sryybjf funzryrffyl
hapbirergu uvzfrys!  6:21 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb Zvpuny, Vg jnf orsber
gur YBEQ, juvpu pubfr zr orsber gul sngure, naq orsber nyy uvf ubhfr,
gb nccbvag zr ehyre bire gur crbcyr bs gur YBEQ, bire Vfenry:
gurersber jvyy V cynl orsber gur YBEQ.

6:22 Naq V jvyy lrg or zber ivyr guna guhf, naq jvyy or onfr va zvar
bja fvtug: naq bs gur znvqfreinagf juvpu gubh unfg fcbxra bs, bs gurz
funyy V or unq va ubabhe.

6:23 Gurersber Zvpuny gur qnhtugre bs Fnhy unq ab puvyq hagb gur qnl
bs ure qrngu.

7:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur xvat fng va uvf ubhfr, naq gur YBEQ
unq tvira uvz erfg ebhaq nobhg sebz nyy uvf rarzvrf; 7:2 Gung gur xvat
fnvq hagb Anguna gur cebcurg, Frr abj, V qjryy va na ubhfr bs prqne,
ohg gur nex bs Tbq qjryyrgu jvguva phegnvaf.

7:3 Naq Anguna fnvq gb gur xvat, Tb, qb nyy gung vf va guvar urneg;
sbe gur YBEQ vf jvgu gurr.

7:4 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff gung avtug, gung gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ pnzr
hagb Anguna, fnlvat, 7:5 Tb naq gryy zl freinag Qnivq, Guhf fnvgu gur
YBEQ, Funyg gubh ohvyq zr na ubhfr sbe zr gb qjryy va?  7:6 Jurernf V
unir abg qjryg va nal ubhfr fvapr gur gvzr gung V oebhtug hc gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry bhg bs Rtlcg, rira gb guvf qnl, ohg unir jnyxrq va
n grag naq va n gnoreanpyr.

7:7 Va nyy gur cynprf jurerva V unir jnyxrq jvgu nyy gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry fcnxr V n jbeq jvgu nal bs gur gevorf bs Vfenry, jubz V
pbzznaqrq gb srrq zl crbcyr Vfenry, fnlvat, Jul ohvyq lr abg zr na
ubhfr bs prqne?  7:8 Abj gurersber fb funyg gubh fnl hagb zl freinag
Qnivq, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ bs ubfgf, V gbbx gurr sebz gur furrcpbgr,
sebz sbyybjvat gur furrc, gb or ehyre bire zl crbcyr, bire Vfenry: 7:9
Naq V jnf jvgu gurr juvgurefbrire gubh jragrfg, naq unir phg bss nyy
guvar rarzvrf bhg bs gul fvtug, naq unir znqr gurr n terng anzr, yvxr
hagb gur anzr bs gur terng zra gung ner va gur rnegu.

7:10 Zberbire V jvyy nccbvag n cynpr sbe zl crbcyr Vfenry, naq jvyy
cynag gurz, gung gurl znl qjryy va n cynpr bs gurve bja, naq zbir ab
zber; arvgure funyy gur puvyqera bs jvpxrqarff nssyvpg gurz nal zber,
nf orsbergvzr, 7:11 Naq nf fvapr gur gvzr gung V pbzznaqrq whqtrf gb
or bire zl crbcyr Vfenry, naq unir pnhfrq gurr gb erfg sebz nyy guvar
rarzvrf. Nyfb gur YBEQ gryyrgu gurr gung ur jvyy znxr gurr na ubhfr.

7:12 Naq jura gul qnlf or shysvyyrq, naq gubh funyg fyrrc jvgu gul
snguref, V jvyy frg hc gul frrq nsgre gurr, juvpu funyy cebprrq bhg bs
gul objryf, naq V jvyy rfgnoyvfu uvf xvatqbz.

7:13 Ur funyy ohvyq na ubhfr sbe zl anzr, naq V jvyy fgnoyvfu gur
guebar bs uvf xvatqbz sbe rire.

7:14 V jvyy or uvf sngure, naq ur funyy or zl fba. Vs ur pbzzvg
vavdhvgl, V jvyy punfgra uvz jvgu gur ebq bs zra, naq jvgu gur fgevcrf
bs gur puvyqera bs zra: 7:15 Ohg zl zrepl funyy abg qrcneg njnl sebz
uvz, nf V gbbx vg sebz Fnhy, jubz V chg njnl orsber gurr.

7:16 Naq guvar ubhfr naq gul xvatqbz funyy or rfgnoyvfurq sbe rire
orsber gurr: gul guebar funyy or rfgnoyvfurq sbe rire.

7:17 Nppbeqvat gb nyy gurfr jbeqf, naq nppbeqvat gb nyy guvf ivfvba,
fb qvq Anguna fcrnx hagb Qnivq.

7:18 Gura jrag xvat Qnivq va, naq fng orsber gur YBEQ, naq ur fnvq,
Jub nz V, B Ybeq TBQ? naq jung vf zl ubhfr, gung gubh unfg oebhtug zr
uvguregb?  7:19 Naq guvf jnf lrg n fznyy guvat va gul fvtug, B Ybeq
TBQ; ohg gubh unfg fcbxra nyfb bs gul freinag'f ubhfr sbe n terng
juvyr gb pbzr. Naq vf guvf gur znaare bs zna, B Ybeq TBQ?  7:20 Naq
jung pna Qnivq fnl zber hagb gurr? sbe gubh, Ybeq TBQ, xabjrfg gul
freinag.

7:21 Sbe gul jbeq'f fnxr, naq nppbeqvat gb guvar bja urneg, unfg gubh
qbar nyy gurfr terng guvatf, gb znxr gul freinag xabj gurz.

7:22 Jurersber gubh neg terng, B YBEQ Tbq: sbe gurer vf abar yvxr
gurr, arvgure vf gurer nal Tbq orfvqr gurr, nppbeqvat gb nyy gung jr
unir urneq jvgu bhe rnef.

7:23 Naq jung bar angvba va gur rnegu vf yvxr gul crbcyr, rira yvxr
Vfenry, jubz Tbq jrag gb erqrrz sbe n crbcyr gb uvzfrys, naq gb znxr
uvz n anzr, naq gb qb sbe lbh terng guvatf naq greevoyr, sbe gul ynaq,
orsber gul crbcyr, juvpu gubh erqrrzrqfg gb gurr sebz Rtlcg, sebz gur
angvbaf naq gurve tbqf?  7:24 Sbe gubh unfg pbasvezrq gb gulfrys gul
crbcyr Vfenry gb or n crbcyr hagb gurr sbe rire: naq gubh, YBEQ, neg
orpbzr gurve Tbq.

7:25 Naq abj, B YBEQ Tbq, gur jbeq gung gubh unfg fcbxra pbapreavat
gul freinag, naq pbapreavat uvf ubhfr, rfgnoyvfu vg sbe rire, naq qb
nf gubh unfg fnvq.

7:26 Naq yrg gul anzr or zntavsvrq sbe rire, fnlvat, Gur YBEQ bs ubfgf
vf gur Tbq bire Vfenry: naq yrg gur ubhfr bs gul freinag Qnivq or
rfgnoyvfurq orsber gurr.

7:27 Sbe gubh, B YBEQ bs ubfgf, Tbq bs Vfenry, unfg erirnyrq gb gul
freinag, fnlvat, V jvyy ohvyq gurr na ubhfr: gurersber ungu gul
freinag sbhaq va uvf urneg gb cenl guvf cenlre hagb gurr.

7:28 Naq abj, B Ybeq TBQ, gubh neg gung Tbq, naq gul jbeqf or gehr,
naq gubh unfg cebzvfrq guvf tbbqarff hagb gul freinag: 7:29 Gurersber
abj yrg vg cyrnfr gurr gb oyrff gur ubhfr bs gul freinag, gung vg znl
pbagvahr sbe rire orsber gurr: sbe gubh, B Ybeq TBQ, unfg fcbxra vg:
naq jvgu gul oyrffvat yrg gur ubhfr bs gul freinag or oyrffrq sbe
rire.

8:1 Naq nsgre guvf vg pnzr gb cnff gung Qnivq fzbgr gur Cuvyvfgvarf,
naq fhoqhrq gurz: naq Qnivq gbbx Zrgurtnzznu bhg bs gur unaq bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf.

8:2 Naq ur fzbgr Zbno, naq zrnfherq gurz jvgu n yvar, pnfgvat gurz
qbja gb gur tebhaq; rira jvgu gjb yvarf zrnfherq ur gb chg gb qrngu,
naq jvgu bar shyy yvar gb xrrc nyvir. Naq fb gur Zbnovgrf orpnzr
Qnivq'f freinagf, naq oebhtug tvsgf.

8:3 Qnivq fzbgr nyfb Unqnqrmre, gur fba bs Erubo, xvat bs Mbonu, nf ur
jrag gb erpbire uvf obeqre ng gur evire Rhcuengrf.

8:4 Naq Qnivq gbbx sebz uvz n gubhfnaq punevbgf, naq frira uhaqerq
ubefrzra, naq gjragl gubhfnaq sbbgzra: naq Qnivq ubhturq nyy gur
punevbg ubefrf, ohg erfreirq bs gurz sbe na uhaqerq punevbgf.

8:5 Naq jura gur Flevnaf bs Qnznfphf pnzr gb fhppbhe Unqnqrmre xvat bs
Mbonu, Qnivq fyrj bs gur Flevnaf gjb naq gjragl gubhfnaq zra.

8:6 Gura Qnivq chg tneevfbaf va Flevn bs Qnznfphf: naq gur Flevnaf
orpnzr freinagf gb Qnivq, naq oebhtug tvsgf. Naq gur YBEQ cerfreirq
Qnivq juvgurefbrire ur jrag.

8:7 Naq Qnivq gbbx gur fuvryqf bs tbyq gung jrer ba gur freinagf bs
Unqnqrmre, naq oebhtug gurz gb Wrehfnyrz.

8:8 Naq sebz Orgnu, naq sebz Orebgunv, pvgvrf bs Unqnqrmre, xvat Qnivq
gbbx rkprrqvat zhpu oenff.

8:9 Jura Gbv xvat bs Unzngu urneq gung Qnivq unq fzvggra nyy gur ubfg
bs Unqnqrmre, 8:10 Gura Gbv frag Wbenz uvf fba hagb xvat Qnivq, gb
fnyhgr uvz, naq gb oyrff uvz, orpnhfr ur unq sbhtug ntnvafg Unqnqrmre,
naq fzvggra uvz: sbe Unqnqrmre unq jnef jvgu Gbv. Naq Wbenz oebhtug
jvgu uvz irffryf bs fvyire, naq irffryf bs tbyq, naq irffryf bs oenff:
8:11 Juvpu nyfb xvat Qnivq qvq qrqvpngr hagb gur YBEQ, jvgu gur fvyire
naq tbyq gung ur unq qrqvpngrq bs nyy angvbaf juvpu ur fhoqhrq; 8:12
Bs Flevn, naq bs Zbno, naq bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba, naq bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf, naq bs Nznyrx, naq bs gur fcbvy bs Unqnqrmre, fba bs
Erubo, xvat bs Mbonu.

8:13 Naq Qnivq tng uvz n anzr jura ur erghearq sebz fzvgvat bs gur
Flevnaf va gur inyyrl bs fnyg, orvat rvtugrra gubhfnaq zra.

8:14 Naq ur chg tneevfbaf va Rqbz; guebhtubhg nyy Rqbz chg ur
tneevfbaf, naq nyy gurl bs Rqbz orpnzr Qnivq'f freinagf. Naq gur YBEQ
cerfreirq Qnivq juvgurefbrire ur jrag.

8:15 Naq Qnivq ervtarq bire nyy Vfenry; naq Qnivq rkrphgrq whqtzrag
naq whfgvpr hagb nyy uvf crbcyr.

8:16 Naq Wbno gur fba bs Mrehvnu jnf bire gur ubfg; naq Wrubfuncung
gur fba bs Nuvyhq jnf erpbeqre; 8:17 Naq Mnqbx gur fba bs Nuvgho, naq
Nuvzryrpu gur fba bs Novngune, jrer gur cevrfgf; naq Frenvnu jnf gur
fpevor; 8:18 Naq Oranvnu gur fba bs Wrubvnqn jnf bire obgu gur
Purerguvgrf naq gur Cryrguvgrf; naq Qnivq'f fbaf jrer puvrs ehyref.

9:1 Naq Qnivq fnvq, Vf gurer lrg nal gung vf yrsg bs gur ubhfr bs
Fnhy, gung V znl furj uvz xvaqarff sbe Wbanguna'f fnxr?  9:2 Naq gurer
jnf bs gur ubhfr bs Fnhy n freinag jubfr anzr jnf Mvon. Naq jura gurl
unq pnyyrq uvz hagb Qnivq, gur xvat fnvq hagb uvz, Neg gubh Mvon?  Naq
ur fnvq, Gul freinag vf ur.

9:3 Naq gur xvat fnvq, Vf gurer abg lrg nal bs gur ubhfr bs Fnhy, gung
V znl furj gur xvaqarff bs Tbq hagb uvz? Naq Mvon fnvq hagb gur xvat,
Wbanguna ungu lrg n fba, juvpu vf ynzr ba uvf srrg.

9:4 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb uvz, Jurer vf ur? Naq Mvon fnvq hagb gur
xvat, Orubyq, ur vf va gur ubhfr bs Znpuve, gur fba bs Nzzvry, va
Ybqrone.

9:5 Gura xvat Qnivq frag, naq srgpurq uvz bhg bs gur ubhfr bs Znpuve,
gur fba bs Nzzvry, sebz Ybqrone.

9:6 Abj jura Zrcuvobfurgu, gur fba bs Wbanguna, gur fba bs Fnhy, jnf
pbzr hagb Qnivq, ur sryy ba uvf snpr, naq qvq erirerapr. Naq Qnivq
fnvq, Zrcuvobfurgu. Naq ur nafjrerq, Orubyq gul freinag!  9:7 Naq
Qnivq fnvq hagb uvz, Srne abg: sbe V jvyy fheryl furj gurr xvaqarff
sbe Wbanguna gul sngure'f fnxr, naq jvyy erfgber gurr nyy gur ynaq bs
Fnhy gul sngure; naq gubh funyg rng oernq ng zl gnoyr pbagvahnyyl.

9:8 Naq ur objrq uvzfrys, naq fnvq, Jung vf gul freinag, gung gubh
fubhyqrfg ybbx hcba fhpu n qrnq qbt nf V nz?  9:9 Gura gur xvat pnyyrq
gb Mvon, Fnhy'f freinag, naq fnvq hagb uvz, V unir tvira hagb gul
znfgre'f fba nyy gung cregnvarq gb Fnhy naq gb nyy uvf ubhfr.

9:10 Gubh gurersber, naq gul fbaf, naq gul freinagf, funyy gvyy gur
ynaq sbe uvz, naq gubh funyg oevat va gur sehvgf, gung gul znfgre'f
fba znl unir sbbq gb rng: ohg Zrcuvobfurgu gul znfgre'f fba funyy rng
oernq nyjnl ng zl gnoyr. Abj Mvon unq svsgrra fbaf naq gjragl
freinagf.

9:11 Gura fnvq Mvon hagb gur xvat, Nppbeqvat gb nyy gung zl ybeq gur
xvat ungu pbzznaqrq uvf freinag, fb funyy gul freinag qb. Nf sbe
Zrcuvobfurgu, fnvq gur xvat, ur funyy rng ng zl gnoyr, nf bar bs gur
xvat'f fbaf.

9:12 Naq Zrcuvobfurgu unq n lbhat fba, jubfr anzr jnf Zvpun. Naq nyy
gung qjryg va gur ubhfr bs Mvon jrer freinagf hagb Zrcuvobfurgu.

9:13 Fb Zrcuvobfurgu qjryg va Wrehfnyrz: sbe ur qvq rng pbagvahnyyl ng
gur xvat'f gnoyr; naq jnf ynzr ba obgu uvf srrg.

10:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre guvf, gung gur xvat bs gur puvyqera bs
Nzzba qvrq, naq Unaha uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

10:2 Gura fnvq Qnivq, V jvyy furj xvaqarff hagb Unaha gur fba bs
Anunfu, nf uvf sngure furjrq xvaqarff hagb zr. Naq Qnivq frag gb
pbzsbeg uvz ol gur unaq bs uvf freinagf sbe uvf sngure. Naq Qnivq'f
freinagf pnzr vagb gur ynaq bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba.

10:3 Naq gur cevaprf bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba fnvq hagb Unaha gurve
ybeq, Guvaxrfg gubh gung Qnivq qbgu ubabhe gul sngure, gung ur ungu
frag pbzsbegref hagb gurr? ungu abg Qnivq engure frag uvf freinagf
hagb gurr, gb frnepu gur pvgl, naq gb fcl vg bhg, naq gb bireguebj vg?
10:4 Jurersber Unaha gbbx Qnivq'f freinagf, naq funirq bss gur bar
unys bs gurve orneqf, naq phg bss gurve tnezragf va gur zvqqyr, rira
gb gurve ohggbpxf, naq frag gurz njnl.

10:5 Jura gurl gbyq vg hagb Qnivq, ur frag gb zrrg gurz, orpnhfr gur
zra jrer terngyl nfunzrq: naq gur xvat fnvq, Gneel ng Wrevpub hagvy
lbhe orneqf or tebja, naq gura erghea.

10:6 Naq jura gur puvyqera bs Nzzba fnj gung gurl fgnax orsber Qnivq,
gur puvyqera bs Nzzba frag naq uverq gur Flevnaf bs Orguerubo naq gur
Flevnaf bs Mbon, gjragl gubhfnaq sbbgzra, naq bs xvat Znnpnu n
gubhfnaq zra, naq bs Vfugbo gjryir gubhfnaq zra.

10:7 Naq jura Qnivq urneq bs vg, ur frag Wbno, naq nyy gur ubfg bs gur
zvtugl zra.

10:8 Naq gur puvyqera bs Nzzba pnzr bhg, naq chg gur onggyr va neenl
ng gur ragrevat va bs gur tngr: naq gur Flevnaf bs Mbon, naq bs Erubo,
naq Vfugbo, naq Znnpnu, jrer ol gurzfryirf va gur svryq.

10:9 Jura Wbno fnj gung gur sebag bs gur onggyr jnf ntnvafg uvz orsber
naq oruvaq, ur pubfr bs nyy gur pubvpr zra bs Vfenry, naq chg gurz va
neenl ntnvafg gur Flevnaf: 10:10 Naq gur erfg bs gur crbcyr ur
qryvirerq vagb gur unaq bs Novfunv uvf oebgure, gung ur zvtug chg gurz
va neenl ntnvafg gur puvyqera bs Nzzba.

10:11 Naq ur fnvq, Vs gur Flevnaf or gbb fgebat sbe zr, gura gubh
funyg uryc zr: ohg vs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba or gbb fgebat sbe gurr,
gura V jvyy pbzr naq uryc gurr.

10:12 Or bs tbbq pbhentr, naq yrg hf cynl gur zra sbe bhe crbcyr, naq
sbe gur pvgvrf bs bhe Tbq: naq gur YBEQ qb gung juvpu frrzrgu uvz
tbbq.

10:13 Naq Wbno qerj avtu, naq gur crbcyr gung jrer jvgu uvz, hagb gur
onggyr ntnvafg gur Flevnaf: naq gurl syrq orsber uvz.

10:14 Naq jura gur puvyqera bs Nzzba fnj gung gur Flevnaf jrer syrq,
gura syrq gurl nyfb orsber Novfunv, naq ragrerq vagb gur pvgl. Fb Wbno
erghearq sebz gur puvyqera bs Nzzba, naq pnzr gb Wrehfnyrz.

10:15 Naq jura gur Flevnaf fnj gung gurl jrer fzvggra orsber Vfenry,
gurl tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure.

10:16 Naq Unqnermre frag, naq oebhtug bhg gur Flevnaf gung jrer orlbaq
gur evire: naq gurl pnzr gb Urynz; naq Fubonpu gur pncgnva bs gur ubfg
bs Unqnermre jrag orsber gurz.

10:17 Naq jura vg jnf gbyq Qnivq, ur tngurerq nyy Vfenry gbtrgure, naq
cnffrq bire Wbeqna, naq pnzr gb Urynz. Naq gur Flevnaf frg gurzfryirf
va neenl ntnvafg Qnivq, naq sbhtug jvgu uvz.

10:18 Naq gur Flevnaf syrq orsber Vfenry; naq Qnivq fyrj gur zra bs
frira uhaqerq punevbgf bs gur Flevnaf, naq sbegl gubhfnaq ubefrzra,
naq fzbgr Fubonpu gur pncgnva bs gurve ubfg, jub qvrq gurer.

10:19 Naq jura nyy gur xvatf gung jrer freinagf gb Unqnermre fnj gung
gurl jrer fzvggra orsber Vfenry, gurl znqr crnpr jvgu Vfenry, naq
freirq gurz. Fb gur Flevnaf srnerq gb uryc gur puvyqera bs Nzzba nal
zber.

11:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nsgre gur lrne jnf rkcverq, ng gur gvzr jura
xvatf tb sbegu gb onggyr, gung Qnivq frag Wbno, naq uvf freinagf jvgu
uvz, naq nyy Vfenry; naq gurl qrfgeblrq gur puvyqera bs Nzzba, naq
orfvrtrq Enoonu. Ohg Qnivq gneevrq fgvyy ng Wrehfnyrz.

11:2 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va na riravatgvqr, gung Qnivq nebfr sebz bss
uvf orq, naq jnyxrq hcba gur ebbs bs gur xvat'f ubhfr: naq sebz gur
ebbs ur fnj n jbzna jnfuvat urefrys; naq gur jbzna jnf irel ornhgvshy
gb ybbx hcba.

11:3 Naq Qnivq frag naq radhverq nsgre gur jbzna. Naq bar fnvq, Vf abg
guvf Ongufuron, gur qnhtugre bs Ryvnz, gur jvsr bs Hevnu gur Uvggvgr?
11:4 Naq Qnivq frag zrffratref, naq gbbx ure; naq fur pnzr va hagb
uvz, naq ur ynl jvgu ure; sbe fur jnf chevsvrq sebz ure hapyrnaarff:
naq fur erghearq hagb ure ubhfr.

11:5 Naq gur jbzna pbaprvirq, naq frag naq gbyq Qnivq, naq fnvq, V nz
jvgu puvyq.

11:6 Naq Qnivq frag gb Wbno, fnlvat, Fraq zr Hevnu gur Uvggvgr. Naq
Wbno frag Hevnu gb Qnivq.

11:7 Naq jura Hevnu jnf pbzr hagb uvz, Qnivq qrznaqrq bs uvz ubj Wbno
qvq, naq ubj gur crbcyr qvq, naq ubj gur jne cebfcrerq.

11:8 Naq Qnivq fnvq gb Hevnu, Tb qbja gb gul ubhfr, naq jnfu gul srrg.
Naq Hevnu qrcnegrq bhg bs gur xvat'f ubhfr, naq gurer sbyybjrq uvz n
zrff bs zrng sebz gur xvat.

11:9 Ohg Hevnu fyrcg ng gur qbbe bs gur xvat'f ubhfr jvgu nyy gur
freinagf bs uvf ybeq, naq jrag abg qbja gb uvf ubhfr.

11:10 Naq jura gurl unq gbyq Qnivq, fnlvat, Hevnu jrag abg qbja hagb
uvf ubhfr, Qnivq fnvq hagb Hevnu, Pnzrfg gubh abg sebz gul wbhearl?
jul gura qvqfg gubh abg tb qbja hagb guvar ubhfr?  11:11 Naq Hevnu
fnvq hagb Qnivq, Gur nex, naq Vfenry, naq Whqnu, novqr va gragf; naq
zl ybeq Wbno, naq gur freinagf bs zl ybeq, ner rapnzcrq va gur bcra
svryqf; funyy V gura tb vagb zvar ubhfr, gb rng naq gb qevax, naq gb
yvr jvgu zl jvsr? nf gubh yvirfg, naq nf gul fbhy yvirgu, V jvyy abg
qb guvf guvat.

11:12 Naq Qnivq fnvq gb Hevnu, Gneel urer gb qnl nyfb, naq gb zbeebj V
jvyy yrg gurr qrcneg. Fb Hevnu nobqr va Wrehfnyrz gung qnl, naq gur
zbeebj.

11:13 Naq jura Qnivq unq pnyyrq uvz, ur qvq rng naq qevax orsber uvz;
naq ur znqr uvz qehax: naq ng rira ur jrag bhg gb yvr ba uvf orq jvgu
gur freinagf bs uvf ybeq, ohg jrag abg qbja gb uvf ubhfr.

11:14 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gur zbeavat, gung Qnivq jebgr n yrggre gb
Wbno, naq frag vg ol gur unaq bs Hevnu.

11:15 Naq ur jebgr va gur yrggre, fnlvat, Frg lr Hevnu va gur
sbersebag bs gur ubggrfg onggyr, naq ergver lr sebz uvz, gung ur znl
or fzvggra, naq qvr.

11:16 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Wbno bofreirq gur pvgl, gung ur
nffvtarq Hevnu hagb n cynpr jurer ur xarj gung inyvnag zra jrer.

11:17 Naq gur zra bs gur pvgl jrag bhg, naq sbhtug jvgu Wbno: naq
gurer sryy fbzr bs gur crbcyr bs gur freinagf bs Qnivq; naq Hevnu gur
Uvggvgr qvrq nyfb.

11:18 Gura Wbno frag naq gbyq Qnivq nyy gur guvatf pbapreavat gur jne;
11:19 Naq punetrq gur zrffratre, fnlvat, Jura gubh unfg znqr na raq bs
gryyvat gur znggref bs gur jne hagb gur xvat, 11:20 Naq vs fb or gung
gur xvat'f jengu nevfr, naq ur fnl hagb gurr, Jurersber nccebnpurq lr
fb avtu hagb gur pvgl jura lr qvq svtug? xarj lr abg gung gurl jbhyq
fubbg sebz gur jnyy?  11:21 Jub fzbgr Novzryrpu gur fba bs
Wrehoorfurgu? qvq abg n jbzna pnfg n cvrpr bs n zvyyfgbar hcba uvz
sebz gur jnyy, gung ur qvrq va Gurorm? jul jrag lr avtu gur jnyy? gura
fnl gubh, Gul freinag Hevnu gur Uvggvgr vf qrnq nyfb.

11:22 Fb gur zrffratre jrag, naq pnzr naq furjrq Qnivq nyy gung Wbno
unq frag uvz sbe.

11:23 Naq gur zrffratre fnvq hagb Qnivq, Fheryl gur zra cerinvyrq
ntnvafg hf, naq pnzr bhg hagb hf vagb gur svryq, naq jr jrer hcba gurz
rira hagb gur ragrevat bs gur tngr.

11:24 Naq gur fubbgref fubg sebz bss gur jnyy hcba gul freinagf; naq
fbzr bs gur xvat'f freinagf or qrnq, naq gul freinag Hevnu gur Uvggvgr
vf qrnq nyfb.

11:25 Gura Qnivq fnvq hagb gur zrffratre, Guhf funyg gubh fnl hagb
Wbno, Yrg abg guvf guvat qvfcyrnfr gurr, sbe gur fjbeq qribhergu bar
nf jryy nf nabgure: znxr gul onggyr zber fgebat ntnvafg gur pvgl, naq
bireguebj vg: naq rapbhentr gubh uvz.

11:26 Naq jura gur jvsr bs Hevnu urneq gung Hevnu ure uhfonaq jnf
qrnq, fur zbhearq sbe ure uhfonaq.

11:27 Naq jura gur zbheavat jnf cnfg, Qnivq frag naq srgpurq ure gb
uvf ubhfr, naq fur orpnzr uvf jvsr, naq oner uvz n fba. Ohg gur guvat
gung Qnivq unq qbar qvfcyrnfrq gur YBEQ.

12:1 Naq gur YBEQ frag Anguna hagb Qnivq. Naq ur pnzr hagb uvz, naq
fnvq hagb uvz, Gurer jrer gjb zra va bar pvgl; gur bar evpu, naq gur
bgure cbbe.

12:2 Gur evpu zna unq rkprrqvat znal sybpxf naq ureqf: 12:3 Ohg gur
cbbe zna unq abguvat, fnir bar yvggyr rjr ynzo, juvpu ur unq obhtug
naq abhevfurq hc: naq vg terj hc gbtrgure jvgu uvz, naq jvgu uvf
puvyqera; vg qvq rng bs uvf bja zrng, naq qenax bs uvf bja phc, naq
ynl va uvf obfbz, naq jnf hagb uvz nf n qnhtugre.

12:4 Naq gurer pnzr n geniryyre hagb gur evpu zna, naq ur fcnerq gb
gnxr bs uvf bja sybpx naq bs uvf bja ureq, gb qerff sbe gur jnlsnevat
zna gung jnf pbzr hagb uvz; ohg gbbx gur cbbe zna'f ynzo, naq qerffrq
vg sbe gur zna gung jnf pbzr gb uvz.

12:5 Naq Qnivq'f natre jnf terngyl xvaqyrq ntnvafg gur zna; naq ur
fnvq gb Anguna, Nf gur YBEQ yvirgu, gur zna gung ungu qbar guvf guvat
funyy fheryl qvr: 12:6 Naq ur funyy erfgber gur ynzo sbhesbyq, orpnhfr
ur qvq guvf guvat, naq orpnhfr ur unq ab cvgl.

12:7 Naq Anguna fnvq gb Qnivq, Gubh neg gur zna. Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ
Tbq bs Vfenry, V nabvagrq gurr xvat bire Vfenry, naq V qryvirerq gurr
bhg bs gur unaq bs Fnhy; 12:8 Naq V tnir gurr gul znfgre'f ubhfr, naq
gul znfgre'f jvirf vagb gul obfbz, naq tnir gurr gur ubhfr bs Vfenry
naq bs Whqnu; naq vs gung unq orra gbb yvggyr, V jbhyq zberbire unir
tvira hagb gurr fhpu naq fhpu guvatf.

12:9 Jurersber unfg gubh qrfcvfrq gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ, gb qb
rivy va uvf fvtug? gubh unfg xvyyrq Hevnu gur Uvggvgr jvgu gur fjbeq,
naq unfg gnxra uvf jvsr gb or gul jvsr, naq unfg fynva uvz jvgu gur
fjbeq bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba.

12:10 Abj gurersber gur fjbeq funyy arire qrcneg sebz guvar ubhfr;
orpnhfr gubh unfg qrfcvfrq zr, naq unfg gnxra gur jvsr bs Hevnu gur
Uvggvgr gb or gul jvsr.

12:11 Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Orubyq, V jvyy envfr hc rivy ntnvafg gurr
bhg bs guvar bja ubhfr, naq V jvyy gnxr gul jvirf orsber guvar rlrf,
naq tvir gurz hagb gul arvtuobhe, naq ur funyy yvr jvgu gul jvirf va
gur fvtug bs guvf fha.

12:12 Sbe gubh qvqfg vg frpergyl: ohg V jvyy qb guvf guvat orsber nyy
Vfenry, naq orsber gur fha.

12:13 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb Anguna, V unir fvaarq ntnvafg gur YBEQ. Naq
Anguna fnvq hagb Qnivq, Gur YBEQ nyfb ungu chg njnl gul fva; gubh
funyg abg qvr.

12:14 Ubjorvg, orpnhfr ol guvf qrrq gubh unfg tvira terng bppnfvba gb
gur rarzvrf bs gur YBEQ gb oynfcurzr, gur puvyq nyfb gung vf obea hagb
gurr funyy fheryl qvr.

12:15 Naq Anguna qrcnegrq hagb uvf ubhfr. Naq gur YBEQ fgehpx gur
puvyq gung Hevnu'f jvsr oner hagb Qnivq, naq vg jnf irel fvpx.

12:16 Qnivq gurersber orfbhtug Tbq sbe gur puvyq; naq Qnivq snfgrq,
naq jrag va, naq ynl nyy avtug hcba gur rnegu.

12:17 Naq gur ryqref bs uvf ubhfr nebfr, naq jrag gb uvz, gb envfr uvz
hc sebz gur rnegu: ohg ur jbhyq abg, arvgure qvq ur rng oernq jvgu
gurz.

12:18 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ba gur friragu qnl, gung gur puvyq qvrq. Naq
gur freinagf bs Qnivq srnerq gb gryy uvz gung gur puvyq jnf qrnq: sbe
gurl fnvq, Orubyq, juvyr gur puvyq jnf lrg nyvir, jr fcnxr hagb uvz,
naq ur jbhyq abg urnexra hagb bhe ibvpr: ubj jvyy ur gura irk uvzfrys,
vs jr gryy uvz gung gur puvyq vf qrnq?  12:19 Ohg jura Qnivq fnj gung
uvf freinagf juvfcrerq, Qnivq creprvirq gung gur puvyq jnf qrnq:
gurersber Qnivq fnvq hagb uvf freinagf, Vf gur puvyq qrnq? Naq gurl
fnvq, Ur vf qrnq.

12:20 Gura Qnivq nebfr sebz gur rnegu, naq jnfurq, naq nabvagrq
uvzfrys, naq punatrq uvf nccnery, naq pnzr vagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ,
naq jbefuvccrq: gura ur pnzr gb uvf bja ubhfr; naq jura ur erdhverq,
gurl frg oernq orsber uvz, naq ur qvq rng.

12:21 Gura fnvq uvf freinagf hagb uvz, Jung guvat vf guvf gung gubh
unfg qbar? gubh qvqfg snfg naq jrrc sbe gur puvyq, juvyr vg jnf nyvir;
ohg jura gur puvyq jnf qrnq, gubh qvqfg evfr naq rng oernq.

12:22 Naq ur fnvq, Juvyr gur puvyq jnf lrg nyvir, V snfgrq naq jrcg:
sbe V fnvq, Jub pna gryy jurgure TBQ jvyy or tenpvbhf gb zr, gung gur
puvyq znl yvir?  12:23 Ohg abj ur vf qrnq, jurersber fubhyq V snfg?
pna V oevat uvz onpx ntnva? V funyy tb gb uvz, ohg ur funyy abg erghea
gb zr.

12:24 Naq Qnivq pbzsbegrq Ongufuron uvf jvsr, naq jrag va hagb ure,
naq ynl jvgu ure: naq fur oner n fba, naq ur pnyyrq uvf anzr Fbybzba:
naq gur YBEQ ybirq uvz.

12:25 Naq ur frag ol gur unaq bs Anguna gur cebcurg; naq ur pnyyrq uvf
anzr Wrqvqvnu, orpnhfr bs gur YBEQ.

12:26 Naq Wbno sbhtug ntnvafg Enoonu bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba, naq
gbbx gur eblny pvgl.

12:27 Naq Wbno frag zrffratref gb Qnivq, naq fnvq, V unir sbhtug
ntnvafg Enoonu, naq unir gnxra gur pvgl bs jngref.

12:28 Abj gurersber tngure gur erfg bs gur crbcyr gbtrgure, naq rapnzc
ntnvafg gur pvgl, naq gnxr vg: yrfg V gnxr gur pvgl, naq vg or pnyyrq
nsgre zl anzr.

12:29 Naq Qnivq tngurerq nyy gur crbcyr gbtrgure, naq jrag gb Enoonu,
naq sbhtug ntnvafg vg, naq gbbx vg.

12:30 Naq ur gbbx gurve xvat'f pebja sebz bss uvf urnq, gur jrvtug
jurerbs jnf n gnyrag bs tbyq jvgu gur cerpvbhf fgbarf: naq vg jnf frg
ba Qnivq'f urnq. Naq ur oebhtug sbegu gur fcbvy bs gur pvgl va terng
nohaqnapr.

12:31 Naq ur oebhtug sbegu gur crbcyr gung jrer gurerva, naq chg gurz
haqre fnjf, naq haqre uneebjf bs veba, naq haqre nkrf bs veba, naq
znqr gurz cnff guebhtu gur oevpx-xvya: naq guhf qvq ur hagb nyy gur
pvgvrf bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba. Fb Qnivq naq nyy gur crbcyr erghearq
hagb Wrehfnyrz.

13:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre guvf, gung Nofnybz gur fba bs Qnivq unq
n snve fvfgre, jubfr anzr jnf Gnzne; naq Nzaba gur fba bs Qnivq ybirq
ure.

13:2 Naq Nzaba jnf fb irkrq, gung ur sryy fvpx sbe uvf fvfgre Gnzne;
sbe fur jnf n ivetva; naq Nzaba gubhtug vg uneq sbe uvz gb qb nalguvat
gb ure.

13:3 Ohg Nzaba unq n sevraq, jubfr anzr jnf Wbanqno, gur fba bs
Fuvzrnu Qnivq'f oebgure: naq Wbanqno jnf n irel fhogvy zna.

13:4 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Jul neg gubh, orvat gur xvat'f fba, yrna
sebz qnl gb qnl? jvyg gubh abg gryy zr? Naq Nzaba fnvq hagb uvz, V
ybir Gnzne, zl oebgure Nofnybz'f fvfgre.

13:5 Naq Wbanqno fnvq hagb uvz, Ynl gurr qbja ba gul orq, naq znxr
gulfrys fvpx: naq jura gul sngure pbzrgu gb frr gurr, fnl hagb uvz, V
cenl gurr, yrg zl fvfgre Gnzne pbzr, naq tvir zr zrng, naq qerff gur
zrng va zl fvtug, gung V znl frr vg, naq rng vg ng ure unaq.

13:6 Fb Nzaba ynl qbja, naq znqr uvzfrys fvpx: naq jura gur xvat jnf
pbzr gb frr uvz, Nzaba fnvq hagb gur xvat, V cenl gurr, yrg Gnzne zl
fvfgre pbzr, naq znxr zr n pbhcyr bs pnxrf va zl fvtug, gung V znl rng
ng ure unaq.

13:7 Gura Qnivq frag ubzr gb Gnzne, fnlvat, Tb abj gb gul oebgure
Nzaba'f ubhfr, naq qerff uvz zrng.

13:8 Fb Gnzne jrag gb ure oebgure Nzaba'f ubhfr; naq ur jnf ynvq qbja.
Naq fur gbbx sybhe, naq xarnqrq vg, naq znqr pnxrf va uvf fvtug, naq
qvq onxr gur pnxrf.

13:9 Naq fur gbbx n cna, naq cbherq gurz bhg orsber uvz; ohg ur
ershfrq gb rng. Naq Nzaba fnvq, Unir bhg nyy zra sebz zr. Naq gurl
jrag bhg rirel zna sebz uvz.

13:10 Naq Nzaba fnvq hagb Gnzne, Oevat gur zrng vagb gur punzore, gung
V znl rng bs guvar unaq. Naq Gnzne gbbx gur pnxrf juvpu fur unq znqr,
naq oebhtug gurz vagb gur punzore gb Nzaba ure oebgure.

13:11 Naq jura fur unq oebhtug gurz hagb uvz gb rng, ur gbbx ubyq bs
ure, naq fnvq hagb ure, Pbzr yvr jvgu zr, zl fvfgre.

13:12 Naq fur nafjrerq uvz, Anl, zl oebgure, qb abg sbepr zr; sbe ab
fhpu guvat bhtug gb or qbar va Vfenry: qb abg gubh guvf sbyyl.

13:13 Naq V, juvgure funyy V pnhfr zl funzr gb tb? naq nf sbe gurr,
gubh funyg or nf bar bs gur sbbyf va Vfenry. Abj gurersber, V cenl
gurr, fcrnx hagb gur xvat; sbe ur jvyy abg jvguubyq zr sebz gurr.

13:14 Ubjorvg ur jbhyq abg urnexra hagb ure ibvpr: ohg, orvat fgebatre
guna fur, sbeprq ure, naq ynl jvgu ure.

13:15 Gura Nzaba ungrq ure rkprrqvatyl; fb gung gur ungerq jurerjvgu
ur ungrq ure jnf terngre guna gur ybir jurerjvgu ur unq ybirq ure. Naq
Nzaba fnvq hagb ure, Nevfr, or tbar.

13:16 Naq fur fnvq hagb uvz, Gurer vf ab pnhfr: guvf rivy va fraqvat
zr njnl vf terngre guna gur bgure gung gubh qvqfg hagb zr. Ohg ur
jbhyq abg urnexra hagb ure.

13:17 Gura ur pnyyrq uvf freinag gung zvavfgrerq hagb uvz, naq fnvq,
Chg abj guvf jbzna bhg sebz zr, naq obyg gur qbbe nsgre ure.

13:18 Naq fur unq n tnezrag bs qviref pbybhef hcba ure: sbe jvgu fhpu
eborf jrer gur xvat'f qnhtugref gung jrer ivetvaf nccneryyrq. Gura uvf
freinag oebhtug ure bhg, naq obygrq gur qbbe nsgre ure.

13:19 Naq Gnzne chg nfurf ba ure urnq, naq erag ure tnezrag bs qviref
pbybhef gung jnf ba ure, naq ynvq ure unaq ba ure urnq, naq jrag ba
pelvat.

13:20 Naq Nofnybz ure oebgure fnvq hagb ure, Ungu Nzaba gul oebgure
orra jvgu gurr? ohg ubyq abj gul crnpr, zl fvfgre: ur vf gul oebgure;
ertneq abg guvf guvat. Fb Gnzne erznvarq qrfbyngr va ure oebgure
Nofnybz'f ubhfr.

13:21 Ohg jura xvat Qnivq urneq bs nyy gurfr guvatf, ur jnf irel
jebgu.

13:22 Naq Nofnybz fcnxr hagb uvf oebgure Nzaba arvgure tbbq abe onq:
sbe Nofnybz ungrq Nzaba, orpnhfr ur unq sbeprq uvf fvfgre Gnzne.

13:23 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre gjb shyy lrnef, gung Nofnybz unq
furrcfurneref va Onnyunmbe, juvpu vf orfvqr Rcuenvz: naq Nofnybz
vaivgrq nyy gur xvat'f fbaf.

13:24 Naq Nofnybz pnzr gb gur xvat, naq fnvq, Orubyq abj, gul freinag
ungu furrcfurneref; yrg gur xvat, V orfrrpu gurr, naq uvf freinagf tb
jvgu gul freinag.

13:25 Naq gur xvat fnvq gb Nofnybz, Anl, zl fba, yrg hf abg nyy abj
tb, yrfg jr or punetrnoyr hagb gurr. Naq ur cerffrq uvz: ubjorvg ur
jbhyq abg tb, ohg oyrffrq uvz.

13:26 Gura fnvq Nofnybz, Vs abg, V cenl gurr, yrg zl oebgure Nzaba tb
jvgu hf. Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb uvz, Jul fubhyq ur tb jvgu gurr?
13:27 Ohg Nofnybz cerffrq uvz, gung ur yrg Nzaba naq nyy gur xvat'f
fbaf tb jvgu uvz.

13:28 Abj Nofnybz unq pbzznaqrq uvf freinagf, fnlvat, Znex lr abj jura
Nzaba'f urneg vf zreel jvgu jvar, naq jura V fnl hagb lbh, Fzvgr
Nzaba; gura xvyy uvz, srne abg: unir abg V pbzznaqrq lbh? or
pbhentrbhf, naq or inyvnag.

13:29 Naq gur freinagf bs Nofnybz qvq hagb Nzaba nf Nofnybz unq
pbzznaqrq.

Gura nyy gur xvat'f fbaf nebfr, naq rirel zna tng uvz hc hcba uvf
zhyr, naq syrq.

13:30 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, juvyr gurl jrer va gur jnl, gung gvqvatf
pnzr gb Qnivq, fnlvat, Nofnybz ungu fynva nyy gur xvat'f fbaf, naq
gurer vf abg bar bs gurz yrsg.

13:31 Gura gur xvat nebfr, naq gner uvf tnezragf, naq ynl ba gur
rnegu; naq nyy uvf freinagf fgbbq ol jvgu gurve pybgurf erag.

13:32 Naq Wbanqno, gur fba bs Fuvzrnu Qnivq'f oebgure, nafjrerq naq
fnvq, Yrg abg zl ybeq fhccbfr gung gurl unir fynva nyy gur lbhat zra
gur xvat'f fbaf; sbe Nzaba bayl vf qrnq: sbe ol gur nccbvagzrag bs
Nofnybz guvf ungu orra qrgrezvarq sebz gur qnl gung ur sbeprq uvf
fvfgre Gnzne.

13:33 Abj gurersber yrg abg zl ybeq gur xvat gnxr gur guvat gb uvf
urneg, gb guvax gung nyy gur xvat'f fbaf ner qrnq: sbe Nzaba bayl vf
qrnq.

13:34 Ohg Nofnybz syrq. Naq gur lbhat zna gung xrcg gur jngpu yvsgrq
hc uvf rlrf, naq ybbxrq, naq, orubyq, gurer pnzr zhpu crbcyr ol gur
jnl bs gur uvyy fvqr oruvaq uvz.

13:35 Naq Wbanqno fnvq hagb gur xvat, Orubyq, gur xvat'f fbaf pbzr: nf
gul freinag fnvq, fb vg vf.

13:36 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf fbba nf ur unq znqr na raq bs fcrnxvat,
gung, orubyq, gur xvat'f fbaf pnzr, naq yvsgrq hc gurve ibvpr naq
jrcg: naq gur xvat nyfb naq nyy uvf freinagf jrcg irel fber.

13:37 Ohg Nofnybz syrq, naq jrag gb Gnyznv, gur fba bs Nzzvuhq, xvat
bs Trfuhe. Naq Qnivq zbhearq sbe uvf fba rirel qnl.

13:38 Fb Nofnybz syrq, naq jrag gb Trfuhe, naq jnf gurer guerr lrnef.

13:39 Naq gur fbhy bs xvat Qnivq ybatrq gb tb sbegu hagb Nofnybz: sbe
ur jnf pbzsbegrq pbapreavat Nzaba, frrvat ur jnf qrnq.

14:1 Abj Wbno gur fba bs Mrehvnu creprvirq gung gur xvat'f urneg jnf
gbjneq Nofnybz.

14:2 Naq Wbno frag gb Grxbnu, naq srgpurq gurapr n jvfr jbzna, naq
fnvq hagb ure, V cenl gurr, srvta gulfrys gb or n zbheare, naq chg ba
abj zbheavat nccnery, naq nabvag abg gulfrys jvgu bvy, ohg or nf n
jbzna gung unq n ybat gvzr zbhearq sbe gur qrnq: 14:3 Naq pbzr gb gur
xvat, naq fcrnx ba guvf znaare hagb uvz. Fb Wbno chg gur jbeqf va ure
zbhgu.

14:4 Naq jura gur jbzna bs Grxbnu fcnxr gb gur xvat, fur sryy ba ure
snpr gb gur tebhaq, naq qvq borvfnapr, naq fnvq, Uryc, B xvat.

14:5 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb ure, Jung nvyrgu gurr? Naq fur nafjrerq, V
nz vaqrrq n jvqbj jbzna, naq zvar uhfonaq vf qrnq.

14:6 Naq gul unaqznvq unq gjb fbaf, naq gurl gjb fgebir gbtrgure va
gur svryq, naq gurer jnf abar gb cneg gurz, ohg gur bar fzbgr gur
bgure, naq fyrj uvz.

14:7 Naq, orubyq, gur jubyr snzvyl vf evfra ntnvafg guvar unaqznvq,
naq gurl fnvq, Qryvire uvz gung fzbgr uvf oebgure, gung jr znl xvyy
uvz, sbe gur yvsr bs uvf oebgure jubz ur fyrj; naq jr jvyy qrfgebl gur
urve nyfb: naq fb gurl funyy dhrapu zl pbny juvpu vf yrsg, naq funyy
abg yrnir gb zl uhfonaq arvgure anzr abe erznvaqre hcba gur rnegu.

14:8 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb gur jbzna, Tb gb guvar ubhfr, naq V jvyy
tvir punetr pbapreavat gurr.

14:9 Naq gur jbzna bs Grxbnu fnvq hagb gur xvat, Zl ybeq, B xvat, gur
vavdhvgl or ba zr, naq ba zl sngure'f ubhfr: naq gur xvat naq uvf
guebar or thvygyrff.

14:10 Naq gur xvat fnvq, Jubrire fnvgu bhtug hagb gurr, oevat uvz gb
zr, naq ur funyy abg gbhpu gurr nal zber.

14:11 Gura fnvq fur, V cenl gurr, yrg gur xvat erzrzore gur YBEQ gul
Tbq, gung gubh jbhyqrfg abg fhssre gur eriratref bs oybbq gb qrfgebl
nal zber, yrfg gurl qrfgebl zl fba. Naq ur fnvq, Nf gur YBEQ yvirgu,
gurer funyy abg bar unve bs gul fba snyy gb gur rnegu.

14:12 Gura gur jbzna fnvq, Yrg guvar unaqznvq, V cenl gurr, fcrnx bar
jbeq hagb zl ybeq gur xvat. Naq ur fnvq, Fnl ba.

14:13 Naq gur jbzna fnvq, Jurersber gura unfg gubh gubhtug fhpu n
guvat ntnvafg gur crbcyr bs Tbq? sbe gur xvat qbgu fcrnx guvf guvat nf
bar juvpu vf snhygl, va gung gur xvat qbgu abg srgpu ubzr ntnva uvf
onavfurq.

14:14 Sbe jr zhfg arrqf qvr, naq ner nf jngre fcvyg ba gur tebhaq,
juvpu pnaabg or tngurerq hc ntnva; arvgure qbgu Tbq erfcrpg nal
crefba: lrg qbgu ur qrivfr zrnaf, gung uvf onavfurq or abg rkcryyrq
sebz uvz.

14:15 Abj gurersber gung V nz pbzr gb fcrnx bs guvf guvat hagb zl ybeq
gur xvat, vg vf orpnhfr gur crbcyr unir znqr zr nsenvq: naq gul
unaqznvq fnvq, V jvyy abj fcrnx hagb gur xvat; vg znl or gung gur xvat
jvyy cresbez gur erdhrfg bs uvf unaqznvq.

14:16 Sbe gur xvat jvyy urne, gb qryvire uvf unaqznvq bhg bs gur unaq
bs gur zna gung jbhyq qrfgebl zr naq zl fba gbtrgure bhg bs gur
vaurevgnapr bs Tbq.

14:17 Gura guvar unaqznvq fnvq, Gur jbeq bs zl ybeq gur xvat funyy abj
or pbzsbegnoyr: sbe nf na natry bs Tbq, fb vf zl ybeq gur xvat gb
qvfprea tbbq naq onq: gurersber gur YBEQ gul Tbq jvyy or jvgu gurr.

14:18 Gura gur xvat nafjrerq naq fnvq hagb gur jbzna, Uvqr abg sebz
zr, V cenl gurr, gur guvat gung V funyy nfx gurr. Naq gur jbzna fnvq,
Yrg zl ybeq gur xvat abj fcrnx.

14:19 Naq gur xvat fnvq, Vf abg gur unaq bs Wbno jvgu gurr va nyy
guvf?  Naq gur jbzna nafjrerq naq fnvq, Nf gul fbhy yvirgu, zl ybeq
gur xvat, abar pna ghea gb gur evtug unaq be gb gur yrsg sebz bhtug
gung zl ybeq gur xvat ungu fcbxra: sbe gul freinag Wbno, ur onqr zr,
naq ur chg nyy gurfr jbeqf va gur zbhgu bs guvar unaqznvq: 14:20 Gb
srgpu nobhg guvf sbez bs fcrrpu ungu gul freinag Wbno qbar guvf guvat:
naq zl ybeq vf jvfr, nppbeqvat gb gur jvfqbz bs na natry bs Tbq, gb
xabj nyy guvatf gung ner va gur rnegu.

14:21 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb Wbno, Orubyq abj, V unir qbar guvf guvat:
tb gurersber, oevat gur lbhat zna Nofnybz ntnva.

14:22 Naq Wbno sryy gb gur tebhaq ba uvf snpr, naq objrq uvzfrys, naq
gunaxrq gur xvat: naq Wbno fnvq, Gb qnl gul freinag xabjrgu gung V
unir sbhaq tenpr va gul fvtug, zl ybeq, B xvat, va gung gur xvat ungu
shysvyyrq gur erdhrfg bs uvf freinag.

14:23 Fb Wbno nebfr naq jrag gb Trfuhe, naq oebhtug Nofnybz gb
Wrehfnyrz.

14:24 Naq gur xvat fnvq, Yrg uvz ghea gb uvf bja ubhfr, naq yrg uvz
abg frr zl snpr. Fb Nofnybz erghearq gb uvf bja ubhfr, naq fnj abg gur
xvat'f snpr.

14:25 Ohg va nyy Vfenry gurer jnf abar gb or fb zhpu cenvfrq nf
Nofnybz sbe uvf ornhgl: sebz gur fbyr bs uvf sbbg rira gb gur pebja bs
uvf urnq gurer jnf ab oyrzvfu va uvz.

14:26 Naq jura ur cbyyrq uvf urnq, (sbe vg jnf ng rirel lrne'f raq
gung ur cbyyrq vg: orpnhfr gur unve jnf urnil ba uvz, gurersber ur
cbyyrq vg:) ur jrvturq gur unve bs uvf urnq ng gjb uhaqerq furxryf
nsgre gur xvat'f jrvtug.

14:27 Naq hagb Nofnybz gurer jrer obea guerr fbaf, naq bar qnhtugre,
jubfr anzr jnf Gnzne: fur jnf n jbzna bs n snve pbhagranapr.

14:28 Fb Nofnybz qjryg gjb shyy lrnef va Wrehfnyrz, naq fnj abg gur
xvat'f snpr.

14:29 Gurersber Nofnybz frag sbe Wbno, gb unir frag uvz gb gur xvat;
ohg ur jbhyq abg pbzr gb uvz: naq jura ur frag ntnva gur frpbaq gvzr,
ur jbhyq abg pbzr.

14:30 Gurersber ur fnvq hagb uvf freinagf, Frr, Wbno'f svryq vf arne
zvar, naq ur ungu oneyrl gurer; tb naq frg vg ba sver. Naq Nofnybz'f
freinagf frg gur svryq ba sver.

14:31 Gura Wbno nebfr, naq pnzr gb Nofnybz hagb uvf ubhfr, naq fnvq
hagb uvz, Jurersber unir gul freinagf frg zl svryq ba sver?  14:32 Naq
Nofnybz nafjrerq Wbno, Orubyq, V frag hagb gurr, fnlvat, Pbzr uvgure,
gung V znl fraq gurr gb gur xvat, gb fnl, Jurersber nz V pbzr sebz
Trfuhe? vg unq orra tbbq sbe zr gb unir orra gurer fgvyy: abj
gurersber yrg zr frr gur xvat'f snpr; naq vs gurer or nal vavdhvgl va
zr, yrg uvz xvyy zr.

14:33 Fb Wbno pnzr gb gur xvat, naq gbyq uvz: naq jura ur unq pnyyrq
sbe Nofnybz, ur pnzr gb gur xvat, naq objrq uvzfrys ba uvf snpr gb gur
tebhaq orsber gur xvat: naq gur xvat xvffrq Nofnybz.

15:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre guvf, gung Nofnybz cercnerq uvz
punevbgf naq ubefrf, naq svsgl zra gb eha orsber uvz.

15:2 Naq Nofnybz ebfr hc rneyl, naq fgbbq orfvqr gur jnl bs gur tngr:
naq vg jnf fb, gung jura nal zna gung unq n pbagebirefl pnzr gb gur
xvat sbe whqtzrag, gura Nofnybz pnyyrq hagb uvz, naq fnvq, Bs jung
pvgl neg gubh? Naq ur fnvq, Gul freinag vf bs bar bs gur gevorf bs
Vfenry.

15:3 Naq Nofnybz fnvq hagb uvz, Frr, gul znggref ner tbbq naq evtug;
ohg gurer vf ab zna qrchgrq bs gur xvat gb urne gurr.

15:4 Nofnybz fnvq zberbire, Bu gung V jrer znqr whqtr va gur ynaq,
gung rirel zna juvpu ungu nal fhvg be pnhfr zvtug pbzr hagb zr, naq V
jbhyq qb uvz whfgvpr!  15:5 Naq vg jnf fb, gung jura nal zna pnzr avtu
gb uvz gb qb uvz borvfnapr, ur chg sbegu uvf unaq, naq gbbx uvz, naq
xvffrq uvz.

15:6 Naq ba guvf znaare qvq Nofnybz gb nyy Vfenry gung pnzr gb gur
xvat sbe whqtzrag: fb Nofnybz fgbyr gur urnegf bs gur zra bs Vfenry.

15:7 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre sbegl lrnef, gung Nofnybz fnvq hagb gur
xvat, V cenl gurr, yrg zr tb naq cnl zl ibj, juvpu V unir ibjrq hagb
gur YBEQ, va Uroeba.

15:8 Sbe gul freinag ibjrq n ibj juvyr V nobqr ng Trfuhe va Flevn,
fnlvat, Vs gur YBEQ funyy oevat zr ntnva vaqrrq gb Wrehfnyrz, gura V
jvyy freir gur YBEQ.

15:9 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb uvz, Tb va crnpr. Fb ur nebfr, naq jrag gb
Uroeba.

15:10 Ohg Nofnybz frag fcvrf guebhtubhg nyy gur gevorf bs Vfenry,
fnlvat, Nf fbba nf lr urne gur fbhaq bs gur gehzcrg, gura lr funyy
fnl, Nofnybz ervtargu va Uroeba.

15:11 Naq jvgu Nofnybz jrag gjb uhaqerq zra bhg bs Wrehfnyrz, gung
jrer pnyyrq; naq gurl jrag va gurve fvzcyvpvgl, naq gurl xarj abg nal
guvat.

15:12 Naq Nofnybz frag sbe Nuvgubcury gur Tvybavgr, Qnivq'f
pbhafryybe, sebz uvf pvgl, rira sebz Tvybu, juvyr ur bssrerq
fnpevsvprf. Naq gur pbafcvenpl jnf fgebat; sbe gur crbcyr vapernfrq
pbagvahnyyl jvgu Nofnybz.

15:13 Naq gurer pnzr n zrffratre gb Qnivq, fnlvat, Gur urnegf bs gur
zra bs Vfenry ner nsgre Nofnybz.

15:14 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb nyy uvf freinagf gung jrer jvgu uvz ng
Wrehfnyrz, Nevfr, naq yrg hf syrr; sbe jr funyy abg ryfr rfpncr sebz
Nofnybz: znxr fcrrq gb qrcneg, yrfg ur biregnxr hf fhqqrayl, naq oevat
rivy hcba hf, naq fzvgr gur pvgl jvgu gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq.

15:15 Naq gur xvat'f freinagf fnvq hagb gur xvat, Orubyq, gul freinagf
ner ernql gb qb jungfbrire zl ybeq gur xvat funyy nccbvag.

15:16 Naq gur xvat jrag sbegu, naq nyy uvf ubhfrubyq nsgre uvz. Naq
gur xvat yrsg gra jbzra, juvpu jrer pbaphovarf, gb xrrc gur ubhfr.

15:17 Naq gur xvat jrag sbegu, naq nyy gur crbcyr nsgre uvz, naq
gneevrq va n cynpr gung jnf sne bss.

15:18 Naq nyy uvf freinagf cnffrq ba orfvqr uvz; naq nyy gur
Purerguvgrf, naq nyy gur Cryrguvgrf, naq nyy gur Tvggvgrf, fvk uhaqerq
zra juvpu pnzr nsgre uvz sebz Tngu, cnffrq ba orsber gur xvat.

15:19 Gura fnvq gur xvat gb Vggnv gur Tvggvgr, Jurersber tbrfg gubh
nyfb jvgu hf? erghea gb gul cynpr, naq novqr jvgu gur xvat: sbe gubh
neg n fgenatre, naq nyfb na rkvyr.

15:20 Jurernf gubh pnzrfg ohg lrfgreqnl, fubhyq V guvf qnl znxr gurr
tb hc naq qbja jvgu hf? frrvat V tb juvgure V znl, erghea gubh, naq
gnxr onpx gul oerguera: zrepl naq gehgu or jvgu gurr.

15:21 Naq Vggnv nafjrerq gur xvat, naq fnvq, Nf gur YBEQ yvirgu, naq
nf zl ybeq gur xvat yvirgu, fheryl va jung cynpr zl ybeq gur xvat
funyy or, jurgure va qrngu be yvsr, rira gurer nyfb jvyy gul freinag
or.

15:22 Naq Qnivq fnvq gb Vggnv, Tb naq cnff bire. Naq Vggnv gur Tvggvgr
cnffrq bire, naq nyy uvf zra, naq nyy gur yvggyr barf gung jrer jvgu
uvz.

15:23 Naq nyy gur pbhagel jrcg jvgu n ybhq ibvpr, naq nyy gur crbcyr
cnffrq bire: gur xvat nyfb uvzfrys cnffrq bire gur oebbx Xvqeba, naq
nyy gur crbcyr cnffrq bire, gbjneq gur jnl bs gur jvyqrearff.

15:24 Naq yb Mnqbx nyfb, naq nyy gur Yrivgrf jrer jvgu uvz, ornevat
gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs Tbq: naq gurl frg qbja gur nex bs Tbq; naq
Novngune jrag hc, hagvy nyy gur crbcyr unq qbar cnffvat bhg bs gur
pvgl.

15:25 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb Mnqbx, Pneel onpx gur nex bs Tbq vagb gur
pvgl: vs V funyy svaq snibhe va gur rlrf bs gur YBEQ, ur jvyy oevat zr
ntnva, naq furj zr obgu vg, naq uvf unovgngvba: 15:26 Ohg vs ur guhf
fnl, V unir ab qryvtug va gurr; orubyq, urer nz V, yrg uvz qb gb zr nf
frrzrgu tbbq hagb uvz.

15:27 Gur xvat fnvq nyfb hagb Mnqbx gur cevrfg, Neg abg gubh n frre?
erghea vagb gur pvgl va crnpr, naq lbhe gjb fbaf jvgu lbh, Nuvznnm gul
fba, naq Wbanguna gur fba bs Novngune.

15:28 Frr, V jvyy gneel va gur cynva bs gur jvyqrearff, hagvy gurer
pbzr jbeq sebz lbh gb pregvsl zr.

15:29 Mnqbx gurersber naq Novngune pneevrq gur nex bs Tbq ntnva gb
Wrehfnyrz: naq gurl gneevrq gurer.

15:30 Naq Qnivq jrag hc ol gur nfprag bs zbhag Byvirg, naq jrcg nf ur
jrag hc, naq unq uvf urnq pbirerq, naq ur jrag onersbbg: naq nyy gur
crbcyr gung jnf jvgu uvz pbirerq rirel zna uvf urnq, naq gurl jrag hc,
jrrcvat nf gurl jrag hc.

15:31 Naq bar gbyq Qnivq, fnlvat, Nuvgubcury vf nzbat gur pbafcvengbef
jvgu Nofnybz. Naq Qnivq fnvq, B YBEQ, V cenl gurr, ghea gur pbhafry bs
Nuvgubcury vagb sbbyvfuarff.

15:32 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung jura Qnivq jnf pbzr gb gur gbc bs gur
zbhag, jurer ur jbefuvccrq Tbq, orubyq, Uhfunv gur Nepuvgr pnzr gb
zrrg uvz jvgu uvf pbng erag, naq rnegu hcba uvf urnq: 15:33 Hagb jubz
Qnivq fnvq, Vs gubh cnffrfg ba jvgu zr, gura gubh funyg or n oheqra
hagb zr: 15:34 Ohg vs gubh erghea gb gur pvgl, naq fnl hagb Nofnybz, V
jvyy or gul freinag, B xvat; nf V unir orra gul sngure'f freinag
uvguregb, fb jvyy V abj nyfb or gul freinag: gura znlrfg gubh sbe zr
qrsrng gur pbhafry bs Nuvgubcury.

15:35 Naq unfg gubh abg gurer jvgu gurr Mnqbx naq Novngune gur
cevrfgf?  gurersber vg funyy or, gung jung guvat fbrire gubh funyg
urne bhg bs gur xvat'f ubhfr, gubh funyg gryy vg gb Mnqbx naq Novngune
gur cevrfgf.

15:36 Orubyq, gurl unir gurer jvgu gurz gurve gjb fbaf, Nuvznnm
Mnqbx'f fba, naq Wbanguna Novngune'f fba; naq ol gurz lr funyy fraq
hagb zr rirel guvat gung lr pna urne.

15:37 Fb Uhfunv Qnivq'f sevraq pnzr vagb gur pvgl, naq Nofnybz pnzr
vagb Wrehfnyrz.

16:1 Naq jura Qnivq jnf n yvggyr cnfg gur gbc bs gur uvyy, orubyq,
Mvon gur freinag bs Zrcuvobfurgu zrg uvz, jvgu n pbhcyr bs nffrf
fnqqyrq, naq hcba gurz gjb uhaqerq ybnirf bs oernq, naq na uhaqerq
ohapurf bs envfvaf, naq na uhaqerq bs fhzzre sehvgf, naq n obggyr bs
jvar.

16:2 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb Mvon, Jung zrnarfg gubh ol gurfr? Naq Mvon
fnvq, Gur nffrf or sbe gur xvat'f ubhfrubyq gb evqr ba; naq gur oernq
naq fhzzre sehvg sbe gur lbhat zra gb rng; naq gur jvar, gung fhpu nf
or snvag va gur jvyqrearff znl qevax.

16:3 Naq gur xvat fnvq, Naq jurer vf gul znfgre'f fba? Naq Mvon fnvq
hagb gur xvat, Orubyq, ur novqrgu ng Wrehfnyrz: sbe ur fnvq, Gb qnl
funyy gur ubhfr bs Vfenry erfgber zr gur xvatqbz bs zl sngure.

16:4 Gura fnvq gur xvat gb Mvon, Orubyq, guvar ner nyy gung cregnvarq
hagb Zrcuvobfurgu. Naq Mvon fnvq, V uhzoyl orfrrpu gurr gung V znl
svaq tenpr va gul fvtug, zl ybeq, B xvat.

16:5 Naq jura xvat Qnivq pnzr gb Onuhevz, orubyq, gurapr pnzr bhg n
zna bs gur snzvyl bs gur ubhfr bs Fnhy, jubfr anzr jnf Fuvzrv, gur fba
bs Tren: ur pnzr sbegu, naq phefrq fgvyy nf ur pnzr.

16:6 Naq ur pnfg fgbarf ng Qnivq, naq ng nyy gur freinagf bs xvat
Qnivq: naq nyy gur crbcyr naq nyy gur zvtugl zra jrer ba uvf evtug
unaq naq ba uvf yrsg.

16:7 Naq guhf fnvq Fuvzrv jura ur phefrq, Pbzr bhg, pbzr bhg, gubh
oybbql zna, naq gubh zna bs Oryvny: 16:8 Gur YBEQ ungu erghearq hcba
gurr nyy gur oybbq bs gur ubhfr bs Fnhy, va jubfr fgrnq gubh unfg
ervtarq; naq gur YBEQ ungu qryvirerq gur xvatqbz vagb gur unaq bs
Nofnybz gul fba: naq, orubyq, gubh neg gnxra va gul zvfpuvrs, orpnhfr
gubh neg n oybbql zna.

16:9 Gura fnvq Novfunv gur fba bs Mrehvnu hagb gur xvat, Jul fubhyq
guvf qrnq qbt phefr zl ybeq gur xvat? yrg zr tb bire, V cenl gurr, naq
gnxr bss uvf urnq.

16:10 Naq gur xvat fnvq, Jung unir V gb qb jvgu lbh, lr fbaf bs
Mrehvnu?  fb yrg uvz phefr, orpnhfr gur YBEQ ungu fnvq hagb uvz, Phefr
Qnivq. Jub funyy gura fnl, Jurersber unfg gubh qbar fb?  16:11 Naq
Qnivq fnvq gb Novfunv, naq gb nyy uvf freinagf, Orubyq, zl fba, juvpu
pnzr sbegu bs zl objryf, frrxrgu zl yvsr: ubj zhpu zber abj znl guvf
Orawnzvgr qb vg? yrg uvz nybar, naq yrg uvz phefr; sbe gur YBEQ ungu
ovqqra uvz.

16:12 Vg znl or gung gur YBEQ jvyy ybbx ba zvar nssyvpgvba, naq gung
gur YBEQ jvyy erdhvgr zr tbbq sbe uvf phefvat guvf qnl.

16:13 Naq nf Qnivq naq uvf zra jrag ol gur jnl, Fuvzrv jrag nybat ba
gur uvyy'f fvqr bire ntnvafg uvz, naq phefrq nf ur jrag, naq guerj
fgbarf ng uvz, naq pnfg qhfg.

16:14 Naq gur xvat, naq nyy gur crbcyr gung jrer jvgu uvz, pnzr jrnel,
naq erserfurq gurzfryirf gurer.

16:15 Naq Nofnybz, naq nyy gur crbcyr gur zra bs Vfenry, pnzr gb
Wrehfnyrz, naq Nuvgubcury jvgu uvz.

16:16 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Uhfunv gur Nepuvgr, Qnivq'f sevraq,
jnf pbzr hagb Nofnybz, gung Uhfunv fnvq hagb Nofnybz, Tbq fnir gur
xvat, Tbq fnir gur xvat.

16:17 Naq Nofnybz fnvq gb Uhfunv, Vf guvf gul xvaqarff gb gul sevraq?
jul jragrfg gubh abg jvgu gul sevraq?  16:18 Naq Uhfunv fnvq hagb
Nofnybz, Anl; ohg jubz gur YBEQ, naq guvf crbcyr, naq nyy gur zra bs
Vfenry, pubbfr, uvf jvyy V or, naq jvgu uvz jvyy V novqr.

16:19 Naq ntnva, jubz fubhyq V freir? fubhyq V abg freir va gur
cerfrapr bs uvf fba? nf V unir freirq va gul sngure'f cerfrapr, fb
jvyy V or va gul cerfrapr.

16:20 Gura fnvq Nofnybz gb Nuvgubcury, Tvir pbhafry nzbat lbh jung jr
funyy qb.

16:21 Naq Nuvgubcury fnvq hagb Nofnybz, Tb va hagb gul sngure'f
pbaphovarf, juvpu ur ungu yrsg gb xrrc gur ubhfr; naq nyy Vfenry funyy
urne gung gubh neg noubeerq bs gul sngure: gura funyy gur unaqf bs nyy
gung ner jvgu gurr or fgebat.

16:22 Fb gurl fcernq Nofnybz n grag hcba gur gbc bs gur ubhfr; naq
Nofnybz jrag va hagb uvf sngure'f pbaphovarf va gur fvtug bs nyy
Vfenry.

16:23 Naq gur pbhafry bs Nuvgubcury, juvpu ur pbhafryyrq va gubfr
qnlf, jnf nf vs n zna unq radhverq ng gur benpyr bs Tbq: fb jnf nyy
gur pbhafry bs Nuvgubcury obgu jvgu Qnivq naq jvgu Nofnybz.

17:1 Zberbire Nuvgubcury fnvq hagb Nofnybz, Yrg zr abj pubbfr bhg
gjryir gubhfnaq zra, naq V jvyy nevfr naq chefhr nsgre Qnivq guvf
avtug: 17:2 Naq V jvyy pbzr hcba uvz juvyr ur vf jrnel naq jrnx
unaqrq, naq jvyy znxr uvz nsenvq: naq nyy gur crbcyr gung ner jvgu uvz
funyy syrr; naq V jvyy fzvgr gur xvat bayl: 17:3 Naq V jvyy oevat onpx
nyy gur crbcyr hagb gurr: gur zna jubz gubh frrxrfg vf nf vs nyy
erghearq: fb nyy gur crbcyr funyy or va crnpr.

17:4 Naq gur fnlvat cyrnfrq Nofnybz jryy, naq nyy gur ryqref bs
Vfenry.

17:5 Gura fnvq Nofnybz, Pnyy abj Uhfunv gur Nepuvgr nyfb, naq yrg hf
urne yvxrjvfr jung ur fnvgu.

17:6 Naq jura Uhfunv jnf pbzr gb Nofnybz, Nofnybz fcnxr hagb uvz,
fnlvat, Nuvgubcury ungu fcbxra nsgre guvf znaare: funyy jr qb nsgre
uvf fnlvat? vs abg; fcrnx gubh.

17:7 Naq Uhfunv fnvq hagb Nofnybz, Gur pbhafry gung Nuvgubcury ungu
tvira vf abg tbbq ng guvf gvzr.

17:8 Sbe, fnvq Uhfunv, gubh xabjrfg gul sngure naq uvf zra, gung gurl
or zvtugl zra, naq gurl or punsrq va gurve zvaqf, nf n orne eboorq bs
ure jurycf va gur svryq: naq gul sngure vf n zna bs jne, naq jvyy abg
ybqtr jvgu gur crbcyr.

17:9 Orubyq, ur vf uvq abj va fbzr cvg, be va fbzr bgure cynpr: naq vg
jvyy pbzr gb cnff, jura fbzr bs gurz or bireguebja ng gur svefg, gung
jubfbrire urnergu vg jvyy fnl, Gurer vf n fynhtugre nzbat gur crbcyr
gung sbyybj Nofnybz.

17:10 Naq ur nyfb gung vf inyvnag, jubfr urneg vf nf gur urneg bs n
yvba, funyy hggreyl zryg: sbe nyy Vfenry xabjrgu gung gul sngure vf n
zvtugl zna, naq gurl juvpu or jvgu uvz ner inyvnag zra.

17:11 Gurersber V pbhafry gung nyy Vfenry or trarenyyl tngurerq hagb
gurr, sebz Qna rira gb Orrefuron, nf gur fnaq gung vf ol gur frn sbe
zhygvghqr; naq gung gubh tb gb onggyr va guvar bja crefba.

17:12 Fb funyy jr pbzr hcba uvz va fbzr cynpr jurer ur funyy or sbhaq,
naq jr jvyy yvtug hcba uvz nf gur qrj snyyrgu ba gur tebhaq: naq bs
uvz naq bs nyy gur zra gung ner jvgu uvz gurer funyy abg or yrsg fb
zhpu nf bar.

17:13 Zberbire, vs ur or tbggra vagb n pvgl, gura funyy nyy Vfenry
oevat ebcrf gb gung pvgl, naq jr jvyy qenj vg vagb gur evire, hagvy
gurer or abg bar fznyy fgbar sbhaq gurer.

17:14 Naq Nofnybz naq nyy gur zra bs Vfenry fnvq, Gur pbhafry bs
Uhfunv gur Nepuvgr vf orggre guna gur pbhafry bs Nuvgubcury. Sbe gur
YBEQ unq nccbvagrq gb qrsrng gur tbbq pbhafry bs Nuvgubcury, gb gur
vagrag gung gur YBEQ zvtug oevat rivy hcba Nofnybz.

17:15 Gura fnvq Uhfunv hagb Mnqbx naq gb Novngune gur cevrfgf, Guhf
naq guhf qvq Nuvgubcury pbhafry Nofnybz naq gur ryqref bs Vfenry; naq
guhf naq guhf unir V pbhafryyrq.

17:16 Abj gurersber fraq dhvpxyl, naq gryy Qnivq, fnlvat, Ybqtr abg
guvf avtug va gur cynvaf bs gur jvyqrearff, ohg fcrrqvyl cnff bire;
yrfg gur xvat or fjnyybjrq hc, naq nyy gur crbcyr gung ner jvgu uvz.

17:17 Abj Wbanguna naq Nuvznnm fgnlrq ol Raebtry; sbe gurl zvtug abg
or frra gb pbzr vagb gur pvgl: naq n jrapu jrag naq gbyq gurz; naq
gurl jrag naq gbyq xvat Qnivq.

17:18 Arireguryrff n ynq fnj gurz, naq gbyq Nofnybz: ohg gurl jrag
obgu bs gurz njnl dhvpxyl, naq pnzr gb n zna'f ubhfr va Onuhevz, juvpu
unq n jryy va uvf pbheg; juvgure gurl jrag qbja.

17:19 Naq gur jbzna gbbx naq fcernq n pbirevat bire gur jryy'f zbhgu,
naq fcernq tebhaq pbea gurerba; naq gur guvat jnf abg xabja.

17:20 Naq jura Nofnybz'f freinagf pnzr gb gur jbzna gb gur ubhfr, gurl
fnvq, Jurer vf Nuvznnm naq Wbanguna? Naq gur jbzna fnvq hagb gurz,
Gurl or tbar bire gur oebbx bs jngre. Naq jura gurl unq fbhtug naq
pbhyq abg svaq gurz, gurl erghearq gb Wrehfnyrz.

17:21 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nsgre gurl jrer qrcnegrq, gung gurl pnzr hc
bhg bs gur jryy, naq jrag naq gbyq xvat Qnivq, naq fnvq hagb Qnivq,
Nevfr, naq cnff dhvpxyl bire gur jngre: sbe guhf ungu Nuvgubcury
pbhafryyrq ntnvafg lbh.

17:22 Gura Qnivq nebfr, naq nyy gur crbcyr gung jrer jvgu uvz, naq
gurl cnffrq bire Wbeqna: ol gur zbeavat yvtug gurer ynpxrq abg bar bs
gurz gung jnf abg tbar bire Wbeqna.

17:23 Naq jura Nuvgubcury fnj gung uvf pbhafry jnf abg sbyybjrq, ur
fnqqyrq uvf nff, naq nebfr, naq tng uvz ubzr gb uvf ubhfr, gb uvf
pvgl, naq chg uvf ubhfrubyq va beqre, naq unatrq uvzfrys, naq qvrq,
naq jnf ohevrq va gur frchypuer bs uvf sngure.

17:24 Gura Qnivq pnzr gb Znunanvz. Naq Nofnybz cnffrq bire Wbeqna, ur
naq nyy gur zra bs Vfenry jvgu uvz.

17:25 Naq Nofnybz znqr Nznfn pncgnva bs gur ubfg vafgrnq bs Wbno:
juvpu Nznfn jnf n zna'f fba, jubfr anzr jnf Vguen na Vfenryvgr, gung
jrag va gb Novtnvy gur qnhtugre bs Anunfu, fvfgre gb Mrehvnu Wbno'f
zbgure.

17:26 Fb Vfenry naq Nofnybz cvgpurq va gur ynaq bs Tvyrnq.

17:27 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Qnivq jnf pbzr gb Znunanvz, gung Fubov
gur fba bs Anunfu bs Enoonu bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba, naq Znpuve gur
fba bs Nzzvry bs Ybqrone, naq Onemvyynv gur Tvyrnqvgr bs Ebtryvz,
17:28 Oebhtug orqf, naq onfbaf, naq rnegura irffryf, naq jurng, naq
oneyrl, naq sybhe, naq cnepurq pbea, naq ornaf, naq yragvyrf, naq
cnepurq chyfr, 17:29 Naq ubarl, naq ohggre, naq furrc, naq purrfr bs
xvar, sbe Qnivq, naq sbe gur crbcyr gung jrer jvgu uvz, gb rng: sbe
gurl fnvq, Gur crbcyr vf uhatel, naq jrnel, naq guvefgl, va gur
jvyqrearff.

18:1 Naq Qnivq ahzorerq gur crbcyr gung jrer jvgu uvz, naq frg
pncgnvaf bs gubhfnaqf, naq pncgnvaf bs uhaqerqf bire gurz.

18:2 Naq Qnivq frag sbegu n guveq cneg bs gur crbcyr haqre gur unaq bs
Wbno, naq n guveq cneg haqre gur unaq bs Novfunv gur fba bs Mrehvnu,
Wbno'f oebgure, naq n guveq cneg haqre gur unaq bs Vggnv gur Tvggvgr.
Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb gur crbcyr, V jvyy fheryl tb sbegu jvgu lbh
zlfrys nyfb.

18:3 Ohg gur crbcyr nafjrerq, Gubh funyg abg tb sbegu: sbe vs jr syrr
njnl, gurl jvyy abg pner sbe hf; arvgure vs unys bs hf qvr, jvyy gurl
pner sbe hf: ohg abj gubh neg jbegu gra gubhfnaq bs hf: gurersber abj
vg vf orggre gung gubh fhppbhe hf bhg bs gur pvgl.

18:4 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb gurz, Jung frrzrgu lbh orfg V jvyy qb. Naq
gur xvat fgbbq ol gur tngr fvqr, naq nyy gur crbcyr pnzr bhg ol
uhaqerqf naq ol gubhfnaqf.

18:5 Naq gur xvat pbzznaqrq Wbno naq Novfunv naq Vggnv, fnlvat, Qrny
tragyl sbe zl fnxr jvgu gur lbhat zna, rira jvgu Nofnybz. Naq nyy gur
crbcyr urneq jura gur xvat tnir nyy gur pncgnvaf punetr pbapreavat
Nofnybz.

18:6 Fb gur crbcyr jrag bhg vagb gur svryq ntnvafg Vfenry: naq gur
onggyr jnf va gur jbbq bs Rcuenvz; 18:7 Jurer gur crbcyr bs Vfenry
jrer fynva orsber gur freinagf bs Qnivq, naq gurer jnf gurer n terng
fynhtugre gung qnl bs gjragl gubhfnaq zra.

18:8 Sbe gur onggyr jnf gurer fpnggrerq bire gur snpr bs nyy gur
pbhagel: naq gur jbbq qribherq zber crbcyr gung qnl guna gur fjbeq
qribherq.

18:9 Naq Nofnybz zrg gur freinagf bs Qnivq. Naq Nofnybz ebqr hcba n
zhyr, naq gur zhyr jrag haqre gur guvpx obhtuf bs n terng bnx, naq uvf
urnq pnhtug ubyq bs gur bnx, naq ur jnf gnxra hc orgjrra gur urnira
naq gur rnegu; naq gur zhyr gung jnf haqre uvz jrag njnl.

18:10 Naq n pregnva zna fnj vg, naq gbyq Wbno, naq fnvq, Orubyq, V fnj
Nofnybz unatrq va na bnx.

18:11 Naq Wbno fnvq hagb gur zna gung gbyq uvz, Naq, orubyq, gubh
fnjrfg uvz, naq jul qvqfg gubh abg fzvgr uvz gurer gb gur tebhaq? naq
V jbhyq unir tvira gurr gra furxryf bs fvyire, naq n tveqyr.

18:12 Naq gur zna fnvq hagb Wbno, Gubhtu V fubhyq erprvir n gubhfnaq
furxryf bs fvyire va zvar unaq, lrg jbhyq V abg chg sbegu zvar unaq
ntnvafg gur xvat'f fba: sbe va bhe urnevat gur xvat punetrq gurr naq
Novfunv naq Vggnv, fnlvat, Orjner gung abar gbhpu gur lbhat zna
Nofnybz.

18:13 Bgurejvfr V fubhyq unir jebhtug snyfrubbq ntnvafg zvar bja yvsr:
sbe gurer vf ab znggre uvq sebz gur xvat, naq gubh gulfrys jbhyqrfg
unir frg gulfrys ntnvafg zr.

18:14 Gura fnvq Wbno, V znl abg gneel guhf jvgu gurr. Naq ur gbbx
guerr qnegf va uvf unaq, naq guehfg gurz guebhtu gur urneg bs Nofnybz,
juvyr ur jnf lrg nyvir va gur zvqfg bs gur bnx.

18:15 Naq gra lbhat zra gung oner Wbno'f nezbhe pbzcnffrq nobhg naq
fzbgr Nofnybz, naq fyrj uvz.

18:16 Naq Wbno oyrj gur gehzcrg, naq gur crbcyr erghearq sebz chefhvat
nsgre Vfenry: sbe Wbno uryq onpx gur crbcyr.

18:17 Naq gurl gbbx Nofnybz, naq pnfg uvz vagb n terng cvg va gur
jbbq, naq ynvq n irel terng urnc bs fgbarf hcba uvz: naq nyy Vfenry
syrq rirel bar gb uvf grag.

18:18 Abj Nofnybz va uvf yvsrgvzr unq gnxra naq ernerq hc sbe uvzfrys
n cvyyne, juvpu vf va gur xvat'f qnyr: sbe ur fnvq, V unir ab fba gb
xrrc zl anzr va erzrzoenapr: naq ur pnyyrq gur cvyyne nsgre uvf bja
anzr: naq vg vf pnyyrq hagb guvf qnl, Nofnybz'f cynpr.

18:19 Gura fnvq Nuvznnm gur fba bs Mnqbx, Yrg zr abj eha, naq orne gur
xvat gvqvatf, ubj gung gur YBEQ ungu niratrq uvz bs uvf rarzvrf.

18:20 Naq Wbno fnvq hagb uvz, Gubh funyg abg orne gvqvatf guvf qnl,
ohg gubh funyg orne gvqvatf nabgure qnl: ohg guvf qnl gubh funyg orne
ab gvqvatf, orpnhfr gur xvat'f fba vf qrnq.

18:21 Gura fnvq Wbno gb Phfuv, Tb gryy gur xvat jung gubh unfg frra.
Naq Phfuv objrq uvzfrys hagb Wbno, naq ena.

18:22 Gura fnvq Nuvznnm gur fba bs Mnqbx lrg ntnva gb Wbno, Ohg
ubjfbrire, yrg zr, V cenl gurr, nyfb eha nsgre Phfuv. Naq Wbno fnvq,
Jurersber jvyg gubh eha, zl fba, frrvat gung gubh unfg ab gvqvatf
ernql?  18:23 Ohg ubjfbrire, fnvq ur, yrg zr eha. Naq ur fnvq hagb
uvz, Eha. Gura Nuvznnm ena ol gur jnl bs gur cynva, naq bireena Phfuv.

18:24 Naq Qnivq fng orgjrra gur gjb tngrf: naq gur jngpuzna jrag hc gb
gur ebbs bire gur tngr hagb gur jnyy, naq yvsgrq hc uvf rlrf, naq
ybbxrq, naq orubyq n zna ehaavat nybar.

18:25 Naq gur jngpuzna pevrq, naq gbyq gur xvat. Naq gur xvat fnvq, Vs
ur or nybar, gurer vf gvqvatf va uvf zbhgu. Naq ur pnzr ncnpr, naq
qerj arne.

18:26 Naq gur jngpuzna fnj nabgure zna ehaavat: naq gur jngpuzna
pnyyrq hagb gur cbegre, naq fnvq, Orubyq nabgure zna ehaavat nybar.
Naq gur xvat fnvq, Ur nyfb oevatrgu gvqvatf.

18:27 Naq gur jngpuzna fnvq, Zr guvaxrgu gur ehaavat bs gur sberzbfg
vf yvxr gur ehaavat bs Nuvznnm gur fba bs Mnqbx. Naq gur xvat fnvq, Ur
vf n tbbq zna, naq pbzrgu jvgu tbbq gvqvatf.

18:28 Naq Nuvznnm pnyyrq, naq fnvq hagb gur xvat, Nyy vf jryy. Naq ur
sryy qbja gb gur rnegu hcba uvf snpr orsber gur xvat, naq fnvq,
Oyrffrq or gur YBEQ gul Tbq, juvpu ungu qryvirerq hc gur zra gung
yvsgrq hc gurve unaq ntnvafg zl ybeq gur xvat.

18:29 Naq gur xvat fnvq, Vf gur lbhat zna Nofnybz fnsr? Naq Nuvznnm
nafjrerq, Jura Wbno frag gur xvat'f freinag, naq zr gul freinag, V fnj
n terng ghzhyg, ohg V xarj abg jung vg jnf.

18:30 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb uvz, Ghea nfvqr, naq fgnaq urer. Naq ur
ghearq nfvqr, naq fgbbq fgvyy.

18:31 Naq, orubyq, Phfuv pnzr; naq Phfuv fnvq, Gvqvatf, zl ybeq gur
xvat: sbe gur YBEQ ungu niratrq gurr guvf qnl bs nyy gurz gung ebfr hc
ntnvafg gurr.

18:32 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb Phfuv, Vf gur lbhat zna Nofnybz fnsr? Naq
Phfuv nafjrerq, Gur rarzvrf bs zl ybeq gur xvat, naq nyy gung evfr
ntnvafg gurr gb qb gurr uheg, or nf gung lbhat zna vf.

18:33 Naq gur xvat jnf zhpu zbirq, naq jrag hc gb gur punzore bire gur
tngr, naq jrcg: naq nf ur jrag, guhf ur fnvq, B zl fba Nofnybz, zl
fba, zl fba Nofnybz! jbhyq Tbq V unq qvrq sbe gurr, B Nofnybz, zl fba,
zl fba!  19:1 Naq vg jnf gbyq Wbno, Orubyq, gur xvat jrrcrgu naq
zbheargu sbe Nofnybz.

19:2 Naq gur ivpgbel gung qnl jnf ghearq vagb zbheavat hagb nyy gur
crbcyr: sbe gur crbcyr urneq fnl gung qnl ubj gur xvat jnf tevrirq sbe
uvf fba.

19:3 Naq gur crbcyr tng gurz ol fgrnygu gung qnl vagb gur pvgl, nf
crbcyr orvat nfunzrq fgrny njnl jura gurl syrr va onggyr.

19:4 Ohg gur xvat pbirerq uvf snpr, naq gur xvat pevrq jvgu n ybhq
ibvpr, B zl fba Nofnybz, B Nofnybz, zl fba, zl fba!  19:5 Naq Wbno
pnzr vagb gur ubhfr gb gur xvat, naq fnvq, Gubh unfg funzrq guvf qnl
gur snprf bs nyy gul freinagf, juvpu guvf qnl unir fnirq gul yvsr, naq
gur yvirf bs gul fbaf naq bs gul qnhtugref, naq gur yvirf bs gul
jvirf, naq gur yvirf bs gul pbaphovarf; 19:6 Va gung gubh ybirfg guvar
rarzvrf, naq ungrfg gul sevraqf. Sbe gubh unfg qrpynerq guvf qnl, gung
gubh ertneqrfg arvgure cevaprf abe freinagf: sbe guvf qnl V creprvir,
gung vs Nofnybz unq yvirq, naq nyy jr unq qvrq guvf qnl, gura vg unq
cyrnfrq gurr jryy.

19:7 Abj gurersber nevfr, tb sbegu, naq fcrnx pbzsbegnoyl hagb gul
freinagf: sbe V fjrne ol gur YBEQ, vs gubh tb abg sbegu, gurer jvyy
abg gneel bar jvgu gurr guvf avtug: naq gung jvyy or jbefr hagb gurr
guna nyy gur rivy gung orsryy gurr sebz gul lbhgu hagvy abj.

19:8 Gura gur xvat nebfr, naq fng va gur tngr. Naq gurl gbyq hagb nyy
gur crbcyr, fnlvat, Orubyq, gur xvat qbgu fvg va gur tngr. Naq nyy gur
crbcyr pnzr orsber gur xvat: sbe Vfenry unq syrq rirel zna gb uvf
grag.

19:9 Naq nyy gur crbcyr jrer ng fgevsr guebhtubhg nyy gur gevorf bs
Vfenry, fnlvat, Gur xvat fnirq hf bhg bs gur unaq bs bhe rarzvrf, naq
ur qryvirerq hf bhg bs gur unaq bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf; naq abj ur vf syrq
bhg bs gur ynaq sbe Nofnybz.

19:10 Naq Nofnybz, jubz jr nabvagrq bire hf, vf qrnq va onggyr. Abj
gurersber jul fcrnx lr abg n jbeq bs oevatvat gur xvat onpx?  19:11
Naq xvat Qnivq frag gb Mnqbx naq gb Novngune gur cevrfgf, fnlvat,
Fcrnx hagb gur ryqref bs Whqnu, fnlvat, Jul ner lr gur ynfg gb oevat
gur xvat onpx gb uvf ubhfr? frrvat gur fcrrpu bs nyy Vfenry vf pbzr gb
gur xvat, rira gb uvf ubhfr.

19:12 Lr ner zl oerguera, lr ner zl obarf naq zl syrfu: jurersber gura
ner lr gur ynfg gb oevat onpx gur xvat?  19:13 Naq fnl lr gb Nznfn,
Neg gubh abg bs zl obar, naq bs zl syrfu? Tbq qb fb gb zr, naq zber
nyfb, vs gubh or abg pncgnva bs gur ubfg orsber zr pbagvahnyyl va gur
ebbz bs Wbno.

19:14 Naq ur objrq gur urneg bs nyy gur zra bs Whqnu, rira nf gur
urneg bs bar zna; fb gung gurl frag guvf jbeq hagb gur xvat, Erghea
gubh, naq nyy gul freinagf.

19:15 Fb gur xvat erghearq, naq pnzr gb Wbeqna. Naq Whqnu pnzr gb
Tvytny, gb tb gb zrrg gur xvat, gb pbaqhpg gur xvat bire Wbeqna.

19:16 Naq Fuvzrv gur fba bs Tren, n Orawnzvgr, juvpu jnf bs Onuhevz,
unfgrq naq pnzr qbja jvgu gur zra bs Whqnu gb zrrg xvat Qnivq.

19:17 Naq gurer jrer n gubhfnaq zra bs Orawnzva jvgu uvz, naq Mvon gur
freinag bs gur ubhfr bs Fnhy, naq uvf svsgrra fbaf naq uvf gjragl
freinagf jvgu uvz; naq gurl jrag bire Wbeqna orsber gur xvat.

19:18 Naq gurer jrag bire n sreel obng gb pneel bire gur xvat'f
ubhfrubyq, naq gb qb jung ur gubhtug tbbq. Naq Fuvzrv gur fba bs Tren
sryy qbja orsber gur xvat, nf ur jnf pbzr bire Wbeqna; 19:19 Naq fnvq
hagb gur xvat, Yrg abg zl ybeq vzchgr vavdhvgl hagb zr, arvgure qb
gubh erzrzore gung juvpu gul freinag qvq creirefryl gur qnl gung zl
ybeq gur xvat jrag bhg bs Wrehfnyrz, gung gur xvat fubhyq gnxr vg gb
uvf urneg.

19:20 Sbe gul freinag qbgu xabj gung V unir fvaarq: gurersber, orubyq,
V nz pbzr gur svefg guvf qnl bs nyy gur ubhfr bs Wbfrcu gb tb qbja gb
zrrg zl ybeq gur xvat.

19:21 Ohg Novfunv gur fba bs Mrehvnu nafjrerq naq fnvq, Funyy abg
Fuvzrv or chg gb qrngu sbe guvf, orpnhfr ur phefrq gur YBEQ'f
nabvagrq?  19:22 Naq Qnivq fnvq, Jung unir V gb qb jvgu lbh, lr fbaf
bs Mrehvnu, gung lr fubhyq guvf qnl or nqirefnevrf hagb zr? funyy
gurer nal zna or chg gb qrngu guvf qnl va Vfenry? sbe qb abg V xabj
gung V nz guvf qnl xvat bire Vfenry?  19:23 Gurersber gur xvat fnvq
hagb Fuvzrv, Gubh funyg abg qvr. Naq gur xvat fjner hagb uvz.

19:24 Naq Zrcuvobfurgu gur fba bs Fnhy pnzr qbja gb zrrg gur xvat, naq
unq arvgure qerffrq uvf srrg, abe gevzzrq uvf orneq, abe jnfurq uvf
pybgurf, sebz gur qnl gur xvat qrcnegrq hagvy gur qnl ur pnzr ntnva va
crnpr.

19:25 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura ur jnf pbzr gb Wrehfnyrz gb zrrg gur
xvat, gung gur xvat fnvq hagb uvz, Jurersber jragrfg abg gubh jvgu zr,
Zrcuvobfurgu?  19:26 Naq ur nafjrerq, Zl ybeq, B xvat, zl freinag
qrprvirq zr: sbe gul freinag fnvq, V jvyy fnqqyr zr na nff, gung V znl
evqr gurerba, naq tb gb gur xvat; orpnhfr gul freinag vf ynzr.

19:27 Naq ur ungu fynaqrerq gul freinag hagb zl ybeq gur xvat; ohg zl
ybeq gur xvat vf nf na natry bs Tbq: qb gurersber jung vf tbbq va
guvar rlrf.

19:28 Sbe nyy bs zl sngure'f ubhfr jrer ohg qrnq zra orsber zl ybeq
gur xvat: lrg qvqfg gubh frg gul freinag nzbat gurz gung qvq rng ng
guvar bja gnoyr. Jung evtug gurersber unir V lrg gb pel nal zber hagb
gur xvat?  19:29 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb uvz, Jul fcrnxrfg gubh nal
zber bs gul znggref? V unir fnvq, Gubh naq Mvon qvivqr gur ynaq.

19:30 Naq Zrcuvobfurgu fnvq hagb gur xvat, Lrn, yrg uvz gnxr nyy,
sbenfzhpu nf zl ybeq gur xvat vf pbzr ntnva va crnpr hagb uvf bja
ubhfr.

19:31 Naq Onemvyynv gur Tvyrnqvgr pnzr qbja sebz Ebtryvz, naq jrag
bire Wbeqna jvgu gur xvat, gb pbaqhpg uvz bire Wbeqna.

19:32 Abj Onemvyynv jnf n irel ntrq zna, rira sbhefpber lrnef byq: naq
ur unq cebivqrq gur xvat bs fhfgranapr juvyr ur ynl ng Znunanvz; sbe
ur jnf n irel terng zna.

19:33 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb Onemvyynv, Pbzr gubh bire jvgu zr, naq V
jvyy srrq gurr jvgu zr va Wrehfnyrz.

19:34 Naq Onemvyynv fnvq hagb gur xvat, Ubj ybat unir V gb yvir, gung
V fubhyq tb hc jvgu gur xvat hagb Wrehfnyrz?  19:35 V nz guvf qnl
sbhefpber lrnef byq: naq pna V qvfprea orgjrra tbbq naq rivy? pna gul
freinag gnfgr jung V rng be jung V qevax? pna V urne nal zber gur
ibvpr bs fvatvat zra naq fvatvat jbzra? jurersber gura fubhyq gul
freinag or lrg n oheqra hagb zl ybeq gur xvat?  19:36 Gul freinag jvyy
tb n yvggyr jnl bire Wbeqna jvgu gur xvat: naq jul fubhyq gur xvat
erpbzcrafr vg zr jvgu fhpu n erjneq?  19:37 Yrg gul freinag, V cenl
gurr, ghea onpx ntnva, gung V znl qvr va zvar bja pvgl, naq or ohevrq
ol gur tenir bs zl sngure naq bs zl zbgure. Ohg orubyq gul freinag
Puvzunz; yrg uvz tb bire jvgu zl ybeq gur xvat; naq qb gb uvz jung
funyy frrz tbbq hagb gurr.

19:38 Naq gur xvat nafjrerq, Puvzunz funyy tb bire jvgu zr, naq V jvyy
qb gb uvz gung juvpu funyy frrz tbbq hagb gurr: naq jungfbrire gubh
funyg erdhver bs zr, gung jvyy V qb sbe gurr.

19:39 Naq nyy gur crbcyr jrag bire Wbeqna. Naq jura gur xvat jnf pbzr
bire, gur xvat xvffrq Onemvyynv, naq oyrffrq uvz; naq ur erghearq hagb
uvf bja cynpr.

19:40 Gura gur xvat jrag ba gb Tvytny, naq Puvzunz jrag ba jvgu uvz:
naq nyy gur crbcyr bs Whqnu pbaqhpgrq gur xvat, naq nyfb unys gur
crbcyr bs Vfenry.

19:41 Naq, orubyq, nyy gur zra bs Vfenry pnzr gb gur xvat, naq fnvq
hagb gur xvat, Jul unir bhe oerguera gur zra bs Whqnu fgbyra gurr
njnl, naq unir oebhtug gur xvat, naq uvf ubhfrubyq, naq nyy Qnivq'f
zra jvgu uvz, bire Wbeqna?  19:42 Naq nyy gur zra bs Whqnu nafjrerq
gur zra bs Vfenry, Orpnhfr gur xvat vf arne bs xva gb hf: jurersber
gura or lr natel sbe guvf znggre? unir jr rngra ng nyy bs gur xvat'f
pbfg? be ungu ur tvira hf nal tvsg?  19:43 Naq gur zra bs Vfenry
nafjrerq gur zra bs Whqnu, naq fnvq, Jr unir gra cnegf va gur xvat,
naq jr unir nyfb zber evtug va Qnivq guna lr: jul gura qvq lr qrfcvfr
hf, gung bhe nqivpr fubhyq abg or svefg unq va oevatvat onpx bhe xvat?
Naq gur jbeqf bs gur zra bs Whqnu jrer svrepre guna gur jbeqf bs gur
zra bs Vfenry.

20:1 Naq gurer unccrarq gb or gurer n zna bs Oryvny, jubfr anzr jnf
Furon, gur fba bs Ovpuev, n Orawnzvgr: naq ur oyrj n gehzcrg, naq
fnvq, Jr unir ab cneg va Qnivq, arvgure unir jr vaurevgnapr va gur fba
bs Wrffr: rirel zna gb uvf gragf, B Vfenry.

20:2 Fb rirel zna bs Vfenry jrag hc sebz nsgre Qnivq, naq sbyybjrq
Furon gur fba bs Ovpuev: ohg gur zra bs Whqnu pynir hagb gurve xvat,
sebz Wbeqna rira gb Wrehfnyrz.

20:3 Naq Qnivq pnzr gb uvf ubhfr ng Wrehfnyrz; naq gur xvat gbbx gur
gra jbzra uvf pbaphovarf, jubz ur unq yrsg gb xrrc gur ubhfr, naq chg
gurz va jneq, naq srq gurz, ohg jrag abg va hagb gurz. Fb gurl jrer
fuhg hc hagb gur qnl bs gurve qrngu, yvivat va jvqbjubbq.

20:4 Gura fnvq gur xvat gb Nznfn, Nffrzoyr zr gur zra bs Whqnu jvguva
guerr qnlf, naq or gubh urer cerfrag.

20:5 Fb Nznfn jrag gb nffrzoyr gur zra bs Whqnu: ohg ur gneevrq ybatre
guna gur frg gvzr juvpu ur unq nccbvagrq uvz.

20:6 Naq Qnivq fnvq gb Novfunv, Abj funyy Furon gur fba bs Ovpuev qb
hf zber unez guna qvq Nofnybz: gnxr gubh gul ybeq'f freinagf, naq
chefhr nsgre uvz, yrfg ur trg uvz sraprq pvgvrf, naq rfpncr hf.

20:7 Naq gurer jrag bhg nsgre uvz Wbno'f zra, naq gur Purerguvgrf, naq
gur Cryrguvgrf, naq nyy gur zvtugl zra: naq gurl jrag bhg bs
Wrehfnyrz, gb chefhr nsgre Furon gur fba bs Ovpuev.

20:8 Jura gurl jrer ng gur terng fgbar juvpu vf va Tvorba, Nznfn jrag
orsber gurz. Naq Wbno'f tnezrag gung ur unq chg ba jnf tveqrq hagb
uvz, naq hcba vg n tveqyr jvgu n fjbeq snfgrarq hcba uvf ybvaf va gur
furngu gurerbs; naq nf ur jrag sbegu vg sryy bhg.

20:9 Naq Wbno fnvq gb Nznfn, Neg gubh va urnygu, zl oebgure? Naq Wbno
gbbx Nznfn ol gur orneq jvgu gur evtug unaq gb xvff uvz.

20:10 Ohg Nznfn gbbx ab urrq gb gur fjbeq gung jnf va Wbno'f unaq: fb
ur fzbgr uvz gurerjvgu va gur svsgu evo, naq furq bhg uvf objryf gb
gur tebhaq, naq fgehpx uvz abg ntnva; naq ur qvrq. Fb Wbno naq Novfunv
uvf oebgure chefhrq nsgre Furon gur fba bs Ovpuev.

20:11 Naq bar bs Wbno'f zra fgbbq ol uvz, naq fnvq, Ur gung snibhergu
Wbno, naq ur gung vf sbe Qnivq, yrg uvz tb nsgre Wbno.

20:12 Naq Nznfn jnyybjrq va oybbq va gur zvqfg bs gur uvtujnl. Naq
jura gur zna fnj gung nyy gur crbcyr fgbbq fgvyy, ur erzbirq Nznfn bhg
bs gur uvtujnl vagb gur svryq, naq pnfg n pybgu hcba uvz, jura ur fnj
gung rirel bar gung pnzr ol uvz fgbbq fgvyy.

20:13 Jura ur jnf erzbirq bhg bs gur uvtujnl, nyy gur crbcyr jrag ba
nsgre Wbno, gb chefhr nsgre Furon gur fba bs Ovpuev.

20:14 Naq ur jrag guebhtu nyy gur gevorf bs Vfenry hagb Nory, naq gb
Orguznnpunu, naq nyy gur Orevgrf: naq gurl jrer tngurerq gbtrgure, naq
jrag nyfb nsgre uvz.

20:15 Naq gurl pnzr naq orfvrtrq uvz va Nory bs Orguznnpunu, naq gurl
pnfg hc n onax ntnvafg gur pvgl, naq vg fgbbq va gur gerapu: naq nyy
gur crbcyr gung jrer jvgu Wbno onggrerq gur jnyy, gb guebj vg qbja.

20:16 Gura pevrq n jvfr jbzna bhg bs gur pvgl, Urne, urne; fnl, V cenl
lbh, hagb Wbno, Pbzr arne uvgure, gung V znl fcrnx jvgu gurr.

20:17 Naq jura ur jnf pbzr arne hagb ure, gur jbzna fnvq, Neg gubh
Wbno?  Naq ur nafjrerq, V nz ur. Gura fur fnvq hagb uvz, Urne gur
jbeqf bs guvar unaqznvq. Naq ur nafjrerq, V qb urne.

20:18 Gura fur fcnxr, fnlvat, Gurl jrer jbag gb fcrnx va byq gvzr,
fnlvat, Gurl funyy fheryl nfx pbhafry ng Nory: naq fb gurl raqrq gur
znggre.

20:19 V nz bar bs gurz gung ner crnprnoyr naq snvgushy va Vfenry: gubh
frrxrfg gb qrfgebl n pvgl naq n zbgure va Vfenry: jul jvyg gubh
fjnyybj hc gur vaurevgnapr bs gur YBEQ?  20:20 Naq Wbno nafjrerq naq
fnvq, Sne or vg, sne or vg sebz zr, gung V fubhyq fjnyybj hc be
qrfgebl.

20:21 Gur znggre vf abg fb: ohg n zna bs zbhag Rcuenvz, Furon gur fba
bs Ovpuev ol anzr, ungu yvsgrq hc uvf unaq ntnvafg gur xvat, rira
ntnvafg Qnivq: qryvire uvz bayl, naq V jvyy qrcneg sebz gur pvgl. Naq
gur jbzna fnvq hagb Wbno, Orubyq, uvf urnq funyy or guebja gb gurr
bire gur jnyy.

20:22 Gura gur jbzna jrag hagb nyy gur crbcyr va ure jvfqbz. Naq gurl
phg bss gur urnq bs Furon gur fba bs Ovpuev, naq pnfg vg bhg gb Wbno.
Naq ur oyrj n gehzcrg, naq gurl ergverq sebz gur pvgl, rirel zna gb
uvf grag. Naq Wbno erghearq gb Wrehfnyrz hagb gur xvat.

20:23 Abj Wbno jnf bire nyy gur ubfg bs Vfenry: naq Oranvnu gur fba bs
Wrubvnqn jnf bire gur Purerguvgrf naq bire gur Cryrguvgrf: 20:24 Naq
Nqbenz jnf bire gur gevohgr: naq Wrubfuncung gur fba bs Nuvyhq jnf
erpbeqre: 20:25 Naq Furin jnf fpevor: naq Mnqbx naq Novngune jrer gur
cevrfgf: 20:26 Naq Ven nyfb gur Wnvevgr jnf n puvrs ehyre nobhg Qnivq.

21:1 Gura gurer jnf n snzvar va gur qnlf bs Qnivq guerr lrnef, lrne
nsgre lrne; naq Qnivq radhverq bs gur YBEQ. Naq gur YBEQ nafjrerq, Vg
vf sbe Fnhy, naq sbe uvf oybbql ubhfr, orpnhfr ur fyrj gur Tvorbavgrf.

21:2 Naq gur xvat pnyyrq gur Tvorbavgrf, naq fnvq hagb gurz; (abj gur
Tvorbavgrf jrer abg bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, ohg bs gur erzanag bs
gur Nzbevgrf; naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry unq fjbea hagb gurz: naq Fnhy
fbhtug gb fynl gurz va uvf mrny gb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry naq Whqnu.)
21:3 Jurersber Qnivq fnvq hagb gur Tvorbavgrf, Jung funyy V qb sbe
lbh?  naq jurerjvgu funyy V znxr gur ngbarzrag, gung lr znl oyrff gur
vaurevgnapr bs gur YBEQ?  21:4 Naq gur Tvorbavgrf fnvq hagb uvz, Jr
jvyy unir ab fvyire abe tbyq bs Fnhy, abe bs uvf ubhfr; arvgure sbe hf
funyg gubh xvyy nal zna va Vfenry. Naq ur fnvq, Jung lr funyy fnl,
gung jvyy V qb sbe lbh.

21:5 Naq gurl nafjrerq gur xvat, Gur zna gung pbafhzrq hf, naq gung
qrivfrq ntnvafg hf gung jr fubhyq or qrfgeblrq sebz erznvavat va nal
bs gur pbnfgf bs Vfenry, 21:6 Yrg frira zra bs uvf fbaf or qryvirerq
hagb hf, naq jr jvyy unat gurz hc hagb gur YBEQ va Tvornu bs Fnhy,
jubz gur YBEQ qvq pubbfr. Naq gur xvat fnvq, V jvyy tvir gurz.

21:7 Ohg gur xvat fcnerq Zrcuvobfurgu, gur fba bs Wbanguna gur fba bs
Fnhy, orpnhfr bs gur YBEQ'f bngu gung jnf orgjrra gurz, orgjrra Qnivq
naq Wbanguna gur fba bs Fnhy.

21:8 Ohg gur xvat gbbx gur gjb fbaf bs Evmcnu gur qnhtugre bs Nvnu,
jubz fur oner hagb Fnhy, Nezbav naq Zrcuvobfurgu; naq gur svir fbaf bs
Zvpuny gur qnhtugre bs Fnhy, jubz fur oebhtug hc sbe Nqevry gur fba bs
Onemvyynv gur Zrubynguvgr: 21:9 Naq ur qryvirerq gurz vagb gur unaqf
bs gur Tvorbavgrf, naq gurl unatrq gurz va gur uvyy orsber gur YBEQ:
naq gurl sryy nyy frira gbtrgure, naq jrer chg gb qrngu va gur qnlf bs
uneirfg, va gur svefg qnlf, va gur ortvaavat bs oneyrl uneirfg.

21:10 Naq Evmcnu gur qnhtugre bs Nvnu gbbx fnpxpybgu, naq fcernq vg
sbe ure hcba gur ebpx, sebz gur ortvaavat bs uneirfg hagvy jngre
qebccrq hcba gurz bhg bs urnira, naq fhssrerq arvgure gur oveqf bs gur
nve gb erfg ba gurz ol qnl, abe gur ornfgf bs gur svryq ol avtug.

21:11 Naq vg jnf gbyq Qnivq jung Evmcnu gur qnhtugre bs Nvnu, gur
pbaphovar bs Fnhy, unq qbar.

21:12 Naq Qnivq jrag naq gbbx gur obarf bs Fnhy naq gur obarf bs
Wbanguna uvf fba sebz gur zra bs Wnorfutvyrnq, juvpu unq fgbyra gurz
sebz gur fgerrg bs Orgufuna, jurer gur Cuvyvfgvarf unq unatrq gurz,
jura gur Cuvyvfgvarf unq fynva Fnhy va Tvyobn: 21:13 Naq ur oebhtug hc
sebz gurapr gur obarf bs Fnhy naq gur obarf bs Wbanguna uvf fba; naq
gurl tngurerq gur obarf bs gurz gung jrer unatrq.

21:14 Naq gur obarf bs Fnhy naq Wbanguna uvf fba ohevrq gurl va gur
pbhagel bs Orawnzva va Mrynu, va gur frchypuer bs Xvfu uvf sngure: naq
gurl cresbezrq nyy gung gur xvat pbzznaqrq. Naq nsgre gung Tbq jnf
vagerngrq sbe gur ynaq.

21:15 Zberbire gur Cuvyvfgvarf unq lrg jne ntnva jvgu Vfenry; naq
Qnivq jrag qbja, naq uvf freinagf jvgu uvz, naq sbhtug ntnvafg gur
Cuvyvfgvarf: naq Qnivq jnkrq snvag.

21:16 Naq Vfuovorabo, juvpu jnf bs gur fbaf bs gur tvnag, gur jrvtug
bs jubfr fcrne jrvturq guerr uhaqerq furxryf bs oenff va jrvtug, ur
orvat tveqrq jvgu n arj fjbeq, gubhtug gb unir fynva Qnivq.

21:17 Ohg Novfunv gur fba bs Mrehvnu fhppbherq uvz, naq fzbgr gur
Cuvyvfgvar, naq xvyyrq uvz. Gura gur zra bs Qnivq fjner hagb uvz,
fnlvat, Gubh funyg tb ab zber bhg jvgu hf gb onggyr, gung gubh dhrapu
abg gur yvtug bs Vfenry.

21:18 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre guvf, gung gurer jnf ntnva n onggyr
jvgu gur Cuvyvfgvarf ng Tbo: gura Fvoorpunv gur Uhfunguvgr fyrj Fncu,
juvpu jnf bs gur fbaf bs gur tvnag.

21:19 Naq gurer jnf ntnva n onggyr va Tbo jvgu gur Cuvyvfgvarf, jurer
Ryunana gur fba bs Wnnerbertvz, n Orguyrurzvgr, fyrj gur oebgure bs
Tbyvngu gur Tvggvgr, gur fgnss bs jubfr fcrne jnf yvxr n jrnire'f
ornz.

21:20 Naq gurer jnf lrg n onggyr va Tngu, jurer jnf n zna bs terng
fgngher, gung unq ba rirel unaq fvk svatref, naq ba rirel sbbg fvk
gbrf, sbhe naq gjragl va ahzore; naq ur nyfb jnf obea gb gur tvnag.

21:21 Naq jura ur qrsvrq Vfenry, Wbanguna gur fba bs Fuvzrnu gur
oebgure bs Qnivq fyrj uvz.

21:22 Gurfr sbhe jrer obea gb gur tvnag va Tngu, naq sryy ol gur unaq
bs Qnivq, naq ol gur unaq bs uvf freinagf.

22:1 Naq Qnivq fcnxr hagb gur YBEQ gur jbeqf bs guvf fbat va gur qnl
gung gur YBEQ unq qryvirerq uvz bhg bs gur unaq bs nyy uvf rarzvrf,
naq bhg bs gur unaq bs Fnhy: 22:2 Naq ur fnvq, Gur YBEQ vf zl ebpx,
naq zl sbegerff, naq zl qryvirere; 22:3 Gur Tbq bs zl ebpx; va uvz
jvyy V gehfg: ur vf zl fuvryq, naq gur ubea bs zl fnyingvba, zl uvtu
gbjre, naq zl ershtr, zl fnivbhe; gubh fnirfg zr sebz ivbyrapr.

22:4 V jvyy pnyy ba gur YBEQ, jub vf jbegul gb or cenvfrq: fb funyy V
or fnirq sebz zvar rarzvrf.

22:5 Jura gur jnirf bs qrngu pbzcnffrq zr, gur sybbqf bs hatbqyl zra
znqr zr nsenvq; 22:6 Gur fbeebjf bs uryy pbzcnffrq zr nobhg; gur
fanerf bs qrngu ceriragrq zr; 22:7 Va zl qvfgerff V pnyyrq hcba gur
YBEQ, naq pevrq gb zl Tbq: naq ur qvq urne zl ibvpr bhg bs uvf grzcyr,
naq zl pel qvq ragre vagb uvf rnef.

22:8 Gura gur rnegu fubbx naq gerzoyrq; gur sbhaqngvbaf bs urnira
zbirq naq fubbx, orpnhfr ur jnf jebgu.

22:9 Gurer jrag hc n fzbxr bhg bs uvf abfgevyf, naq sver bhg bs uvf
zbhgu qribherq: pbnyf jrer xvaqyrq ol vg.

22:10 Ur objrq gur urniraf nyfb, naq pnzr qbja; naq qnexarff jnf haqre
uvf srrg.

22:11 Naq ur ebqr hcba n pureho, naq qvq syl: naq ur jnf frra hcba gur
jvatf bs gur jvaq.

22:12 Naq ur znqr qnexarff cnivyvbaf ebhaq nobhg uvz, qnex jngref, naq
guvpx pybhqf bs gur fxvrf.

22:13 Guebhtu gur oevtugarff orsber uvz jrer pbnyf bs sver xvaqyrq.

22:14 Gur YBEQ guhaqrerq sebz urnira, naq gur zbfg Uvtu hggrerq uvf
ibvpr.

22:15 Naq ur frag bhg neebjf, naq fpnggrerq gurz; yvtugavat, naq
qvfpbzsvgrq gurz.

22:16 Naq gur punaaryf bs gur frn nccrnerq, gur sbhaqngvbaf bs gur
jbeyq jrer qvfpbirerq, ng gur erohxvat bs gur YBEQ, ng gur oynfg bs
gur oerngu bs uvf abfgevyf.

22:17 Ur frag sebz nobir, ur gbbx zr; ur qerj zr bhg bs znal jngref;
22:18 Ur qryvirerq zr sebz zl fgebat rarzl, naq sebz gurz gung ungrq
zr: sbe gurl jrer gbb fgebat sbe zr.

22:19 Gurl ceriragrq zr va gur qnl bs zl pnynzvgl: ohg gur YBEQ jnf zl
fgnl.

22:20 Ur oebhtug zr sbegu nyfb vagb n ynetr cynpr: ur qryvirerq zr,
orpnhfr ur qryvtugrq va zr.

22:21 Gur YBEQ erjneqrq zr nppbeqvat gb zl evtugrbhfarff: nppbeqvat gb
gur pyrnaarff bs zl unaqf ungu ur erpbzcrafrq zr.

22:22 Sbe V unir xrcg gur jnlf bs gur YBEQ, naq unir abg jvpxrqyl
qrcnegrq sebz zl Tbq.

22:23 Sbe nyy uvf whqtzragf jrer orsber zr: naq nf sbe uvf fgnghgrf, V
qvq abg qrcneg sebz gurz.

22:24 V jnf nyfb hcevtug orsber uvz, naq unir xrcg zlfrys sebz zvar
vavdhvgl.

22:25 Gurersber gur YBEQ ungu erpbzcrafrq zr nppbeqvat gb zl
evtugrbhfarff; nppbeqvat gb zl pyrnaarff va uvf rlr fvtug.

22:26 Jvgu gur zrepvshy gubh jvyg furj gulfrys zrepvshy, naq jvgu gur
hcevtug zna gubh jvyg furj gulfrys hcevtug.

22:27 Jvgu gur cher gubh jvyg furj gulfrys cher; naq jvgu gur sebjneq
gubh jvyg furj gulfrys hafnibhel.

22:28 Naq gur nssyvpgrq crbcyr gubh jvyg fnir: ohg guvar rlrf ner hcba
gur unhtugl, gung gubh znlrfg oevat gurz qbja.

22:29 Sbe gubh neg zl ynzc, B YBEQ: naq gur YBEQ jvyy yvtugra zl
qnexarff.

22:30 Sbe ol gurr V unir eha guebhtu n gebbc: ol zl Tbq unir V yrncrq
bire n jnyy.

22:31 Nf sbe Tbq, uvf jnl vf cresrpg; gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ vf gevrq:
ur vf n ohpxyre gb nyy gurz gung gehfg va uvz.

22:32 Sbe jub vf Tbq, fnir gur YBEQ? naq jub vf n ebpx, fnir bhe Tbq?
22:33 Tbq vf zl fgeratgu naq cbjre: naq ur znxrgu zl jnl cresrpg.

22:34 Ur znxrgu zl srrg yvxr uvaqf' srrg: naq frggrgu zr hcba zl uvtu
cynprf.

22:35 Ur grnpurgu zl unaqf gb jne; fb gung n obj bs fgrry vf oebxra ol
zvar nezf.

22:36 Gubh unfg nyfb tvira zr gur fuvryq bs gul fnyingvba: naq gul
tragyrarff ungu znqr zr terng.

22:37 Gubh unfg raynetrq zl fgrcf haqre zr; fb gung zl srrg qvq abg
fyvc.

22:38 V unir chefhrq zvar rarzvrf, naq qrfgeblrq gurz; naq ghearq abg
ntnva hagvy V unq pbafhzrq gurz.

22:39 Naq V unir pbafhzrq gurz, naq jbhaqrq gurz, gung gurl pbhyq abg
nevfr: lrn, gurl ner snyyra haqre zl srrg.

22:40 Sbe gubh unfg tveqrq zr jvgu fgeratgu gb onggyr: gurz gung ebfr
hc ntnvafg zr unfg gubh fhoqhrq haqre zr.

22:41 Gubh unfg nyfb tvira zr gur arpxf bs zvar rarzvrf, gung V zvtug
qrfgebl gurz gung ungr zr.

22:42 Gurl ybbxrq, ohg gurer jnf abar gb fnir; rira hagb gur YBEQ, ohg
ur nafjrerq gurz abg.

22:43 Gura qvq V orng gurz nf fznyy nf gur qhfg bs gur rnegu, V qvq
fgnzc gurz nf gur zver bs gur fgerrg, naq qvq fcernq gurz noebnq.

22:44 Gubh nyfb unfg qryvirerq zr sebz gur fgevivatf bs zl crbcyr,
gubh unfg xrcg zr gb or urnq bs gur urngura: n crbcyr juvpu V xarj abg
funyy freir zr.

22:45 Fgenatref funyy fhozvg gurzfryirf hagb zr: nf fbba nf gurl urne,
gurl funyy or borqvrag hagb zr.

22:46 Fgenatref funyy snqr njnl, naq gurl funyy or nsenvq bhg bs gurve
pybfr cynprf.

22:47 Gur YBEQ yvirgu; naq oyrffrq or zl ebpx; naq rknygrq or gur Tbq
bs gur ebpx bs zl fnyingvba.

22:48 Vg vf Tbq gung niratrgu zr, naq gung oevatrgu qbja gur crbcyr
haqre zr.

22:49 Naq gung oevatrgu zr sbegu sebz zvar rarzvrf: gubh nyfb unfg
yvsgrq zr hc ba uvtu nobir gurz gung ebfr hc ntnvafg zr: gubh unfg
qryvirerq zr sebz gur ivbyrag zna.

22:50 Gurersber V jvyy tvir gunaxf hagb gurr, B YBEQ, nzbat gur
urngura, naq V jvyy fvat cenvfrf hagb gul anzr.

22:51 Ur vf gur gbjre bs fnyingvba sbe uvf xvat: naq furjrgu zrepl gb
uvf nabvagrq, hagb Qnivq, naq gb uvf frrq sbe rirezber.

23:1 Abj gurfr or gur ynfg jbeqf bs Qnivq. Qnivq gur fba bs Wrffr
fnvq, naq gur zna jub jnf envfrq hc ba uvtu, gur nabvagrq bs gur Tbq
bs Wnpbo, naq gur fjrrg cfnyzvfg bs Vfenry, fnvq, 23:2 Gur Fcvevg bs
gur YBEQ fcnxr ol zr, naq uvf jbeq jnf va zl gbathr.

23:3 Gur Tbq bs Vfenry fnvq, gur Ebpx bs Vfenry fcnxr gb zr, Ur gung
ehyrgu bire zra zhfg or whfg, ehyvat va gur srne bs Tbq.

23:4 Naq ur funyy or nf gur yvtug bs gur zbeavat, jura gur fha evfrgu,
rira n zbeavat jvgubhg pybhqf; nf gur graqre tenff fcevatvat bhg bs
gur rnegu ol pyrne fuvavat nsgre enva.

23:5 Nygubhtu zl ubhfr or abg fb jvgu Tbq; lrg ur ungu znqr jvgu zr na
rireynfgvat pbiranag, beqrerq va nyy guvatf, naq fher: sbe guvf vf nyy
zl fnyingvba, naq nyy zl qrfver, nygubhtu ur znxr vg abg gb tebj.

23:6 Ohg gur fbaf bs Oryvny funyy or nyy bs gurz nf gubeaf guehfg
njnl, orpnhfr gurl pnaabg or gnxra jvgu unaqf: 23:7 Ohg gur zna gung
funyy gbhpu gurz zhfg or sraprq jvgu veba naq gur fgnss bs n fcrne;
naq gurl funyy or hggreyl ohearq jvgu sver va gur fnzr cynpr.

23:8 Gurfr or gur anzrf bs gur zvtugl zra jubz Qnivq unq: Gur
Gnpuzbavgr gung fng va gur frng, puvrs nzbat gur pncgnvaf; gur fnzr
jnf Nqvab gur Rmavgr: ur yvsg hc uvf fcrne ntnvafg rvtug uhaqerq, jubz
ur fyrj ng bar gvzr.

23:9 Naq nsgre uvz jnf Ryrnmne gur fba bs Qbqb gur Nubuvgr, bar bs gur
guerr zvtugl zra jvgu Qnivq, jura gurl qrsvrq gur Cuvyvfgvarf gung
jrer gurer tngurerq gbtrgure gb onggyr, naq gur zra bs Vfenry jrer
tbar njnl: 23:10 Ur nebfr, naq fzbgr gur Cuvyvfgvarf hagvy uvf unaq
jnf jrnel, naq uvf unaq pynir hagb gur fjbeq: naq gur YBEQ jebhtug n
terng ivpgbel gung qnl; naq gur crbcyr erghearq nsgre uvz bayl gb
fcbvy.

23:11 Naq nsgre uvz jnf Funzznu gur fba bs Ntrr gur Unenevgr. Naq gur
Cuvyvfgvarf jrer tngurerq gbtrgure vagb n gebbc, jurer jnf n cvrpr bs
tebhaq shyy bs yragvyrf: naq gur crbcyr syrq sebz gur Cuvyvfgvarf.

23:12 Ohg ur fgbbq va gur zvqfg bs gur tebhaq, naq qrsraqrq vg, naq
fyrj gur Cuvyvfgvarf: naq gur YBEQ jebhtug n terng ivpgbel.

23:13 Naq guerr bs gur guvegl puvrs jrag qbja, naq pnzr gb Qnivq va
gur uneirfg gvzr hagb gur pnir bs Nqhyynz: naq gur gebbc bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf cvgpurq va gur inyyrl bs Ercunvz.

23:14 Naq Qnivq jnf gura va na ubyq, naq gur tneevfba bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf jnf gura va Orguyrurz.

23:15 Naq Qnivq ybatrq, naq fnvq, Bu gung bar jbhyq tvir zr qevax bs
gur jngre bs gur jryy bs Orguyrurz, juvpu vf ol gur tngr!  23:16 Naq
gur guerr zvtugl zra oenxr guebhtu gur ubfg bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf, naq
qerj jngre bhg bs gur jryy bs Orguyrurz, gung jnf ol gur tngr, naq
gbbx vg, naq oebhtug vg gb Qnivq: arireguryrff ur jbhyq abg qevax
gurerbs, ohg cbherq vg bhg hagb gur YBEQ.

23:17 Naq ur fnvq, Or vg sne sebz zr, B YBEQ, gung V fubhyq qb guvf:
vf abg guvf gur oybbq bs gur zra gung jrag va wrbcneql bs gurve yvirf?
gurersber ur jbhyq abg qevax vg. Gurfr guvatf qvq gurfr guerr zvtugl
zra.

23:18 Naq Novfunv, gur oebgure bs Wbno, gur fba bs Mrehvnu, jnf puvrs
nzbat guerr. Naq ur yvsgrq hc uvf fcrne ntnvafg guerr uhaqerq, naq
fyrj gurz, naq unq gur anzr nzbat guerr.

23:19 Jnf ur abg zbfg ubabhenoyr bs guerr? gurersber ur jnf gurve
pncgnva: ubjorvg ur nggnvarq abg hagb gur svefg guerr.

23:20 Naq Oranvnu gur fba bs Wrubvnqn, gur fba bs n inyvnag zna, bs
Xnomrry, jub unq qbar znal npgf, ur fyrj gjb yvbayvxr zra bs Zbno: ur
jrag qbja nyfb naq fyrj n yvba va gur zvqfg bs n cvg va gvzr bs fabj:
23:21 Naq ur fyrj na Rtlcgvna, n tbbqyl zna: naq gur Rtlcgvna unq n
fcrne va uvf unaq; ohg ur jrag qbja gb uvz jvgu n fgnss, naq cyhpxrq
gur fcrne bhg bs gur Rtlcgvna'f unaq, naq fyrj uvz jvgu uvf bja fcrne.

23:22 Gurfr guvatf qvq Oranvnu gur fba bs Wrubvnqn, naq unq gur anzr
nzbat guerr zvtugl zra.

23:23 Ur jnf zber ubabhenoyr guna gur guvegl, ohg ur nggnvarq abg gb
gur svefg guerr. Naq Qnivq frg uvz bire uvf thneq.

23:24 Nfnury gur oebgure bs Wbno jnf bar bs gur guvegl; Ryunana gur
fba bs Qbqb bs Orguyrurz, 23:25 Funzznu gur Unebqvgr, Ryvxn gur
Unebqvgr, 23:26 Uryrm gur Cnygvgr, Ven gur fba bs Vxxrfu gur Grxbvgr,
23:27 Novrmre gur Nargubguvgr, Zrohaanv gur Uhfunguvgr, 23:28 Mnyzba
gur Nubuvgr, Znunenv gur Argbcunguvgr, 23:29 Uryro gur fba bs Onnanu,
n Argbcunguvgr, Vggnv gur fba bs Evonv bhg bs Tvornu bs gur puvyqera
bs Orawnzva, 23:30 Oranvnu gur Cvengubavgr, Uvqqnv bs gur oebbxf bs
Tnnfu, 23:31 Novnyoba gur Neonguvgr, Nmznirgu gur Oneuhzvgr, 23:32
Ryvnuon gur Funnyobavgr, bs gur fbaf bs Wnfura, Wbanguna, 23:33
Funzznu gur Unenevgr, Nuvnz gur fba bs Funene gur Unenevgr, 23:34
Ryvcuryrg gur fba bs Nunfonv, gur fba bs gur Znnpunguvgr, Ryvnz gur
fba bs Nuvgubcury gur Tvybavgr, 23:35 Urmenv gur Pnezryvgr, Cnnenv gur
Neovgr, 23:36 Vtny gur fba bs Anguna bs Mbonu, Onav gur Tnqvgr, 23:37
Mryrx gur Nzzbavgr, Anunev gur Orrebguvgr, nezbheornere gb Wbno gur
fba bs Mrehvnu, 23:38 Ven na Vguevgr, Tnero na Vguevgr, 23:39 Hevnu
gur Uvggvgr: guvegl naq frira va nyy.

24:1 Naq ntnva gur natre bs gur YBEQ jnf xvaqyrq ntnvafg Vfenry, naq
ur zbirq Qnivq ntnvafg gurz gb fnl, Tb, ahzore Vfenry naq Whqnu.

24:2 Sbe gur xvat fnvq gb Wbno gur pncgnva bs gur ubfg, juvpu jnf jvgu
uvz, Tb abj guebhtu nyy gur gevorf bs Vfenry, sebz Qna rira gb
Orrefuron, naq ahzore lr gur crbcyr, gung V znl xabj gur ahzore bs gur
crbcyr.

24:3 Naq Wbno fnvq hagb gur xvat, Abj gur YBEQ gul Tbq nqq hagb gur
crbcyr, ubj znal fbrire gurl or, na uhaqerqsbyq, naq gung gur rlrf bs
zl ybeq gur xvat znl frr vg: ohg jul qbgu zl ybeq gur xvat qryvtug va
guvf guvat?  24:4 Abgjvgufgnaqvat gur xvat'f jbeq cerinvyrq ntnvafg
Wbno, naq ntnvafg gur pncgnvaf bs gur ubfg. Naq Wbno naq gur pncgnvaf
bs gur ubfg jrag bhg sebz gur cerfrapr bs gur xvat, gb ahzore gur
crbcyr bs Vfenry.

24:5 Naq gurl cnffrq bire Wbeqna, naq cvgpurq va Nebre, ba gur evtug
fvqr bs gur pvgl gung yvrgu va gur zvqfg bs gur evire bs Tnq, naq
gbjneq Wnmre: 24:6 Gura gurl pnzr gb Tvyrnq, naq gb gur ynaq bs
Gnugvzubqfuv; naq gurl pnzr gb Qnawnna, naq nobhg gb Mvqba, 24:7 Naq
pnzr gb gur fgebat ubyq bs Gler, naq gb nyy gur pvgvrf bs gur Uvivgrf,
naq bs gur Pnannavgrf: naq gurl jrag bhg gb gur fbhgu bs Whqnu, rira
gb Orrefuron.

24:8 Fb jura gurl unq tbar guebhtu nyy gur ynaq, gurl pnzr gb
Wrehfnyrz ng gur raq bs avar zbaguf naq gjragl qnlf.

24:9 Naq Wbno tnir hc gur fhz bs gur ahzore bs gur crbcyr hagb gur
xvat: naq gurer jrer va Vfenry rvtug uhaqerq gubhfnaq inyvnag zra gung
qerj gur fjbeq; naq gur zra bs Whqnu jrer svir uhaqerq gubhfnaq zra.

24:10 Naq Qnivq'f urneg fzbgr uvz nsgre gung ur unq ahzorerq gur
crbcyr.

Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb gur YBEQ, V unir fvaarq terngyl va gung V unir
qbar: naq abj, V orfrrpu gurr, B YBEQ, gnxr njnl gur vavdhvgl bs gul
freinag; sbe V unir qbar irel sbbyvfuyl.

24:11 Sbe jura Qnivq jnf hc va gur zbeavat, gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ pnzr
hagb gur cebcurg Tnq, Qnivq'f frre, fnlvat, 24:12 Tb naq fnl hagb
Qnivq, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, V bssre gurr guerr guvatf; pubbfr gurr bar
bs gurz, gung V znl qb vg hagb gurr.

24:13 Fb Tnq pnzr gb Qnivq, naq gbyq uvz, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Funyy
frira lrnef bs snzvar pbzr hagb gurr va gul ynaq? be jvyg gubh syrr
guerr zbaguf orsber guvar rarzvrf, juvyr gurl chefhr gurr? be gung
gurer or guerr qnlf' crfgvyrapr va gul ynaq? abj nqivfr, naq frr jung
nafjre V funyy erghea gb uvz gung frag zr.

24:14 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb Tnq, V nz va n terng fgenvg: yrg hf snyy abj
vagb gur unaq bs gur YBEQ; sbe uvf zrepvrf ner terng: naq yrg zr abg
snyy vagb gur unaq bs zna.

24:15 Fb gur YBEQ frag n crfgvyrapr hcba Vfenry sebz gur zbeavat rira
gb gur gvzr nccbvagrq: naq gurer qvrq bs gur crbcyr sebz Qna rira gb
Orrefuron friragl gubhfnaq zra.

24:16 Naq jura gur natry fgergpurq bhg uvf unaq hcba Wrehfnyrz gb
qrfgebl vg, gur YBEQ ercragrq uvz bs gur rivy, naq fnvq gb gur natry
gung qrfgeblrq gur crbcyr, Vg vf rabhtu: fgnl abj guvar unaq. Naq gur
natry bs gur YBEQ jnf ol gur guerfuvatcynpr bs Nenhanu gur Wrohfvgr.

24:17 Naq Qnivq fcnxr hagb gur YBEQ jura ur fnj gur natry gung fzbgr
gur crbcyr, naq fnvq, Yb, V unir fvaarq, naq V unir qbar jvpxrqyl: ohg
gurfr furrc, jung unir gurl qbar? yrg guvar unaq, V cenl gurr, or
ntnvafg zr, naq ntnvafg zl sngure'f ubhfr.

24:18 Naq Tnq pnzr gung qnl gb Qnivq, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Tb hc, erne
na nygne hagb gur YBEQ va gur guerfuvatsybbe bs Nenhanu gur Wrohfvgr.

24:19 Naq Qnivq, nppbeqvat gb gur fnlvat bs Tnq, jrag hc nf gur YBEQ
pbzznaqrq.

24:20 Naq Nenhanu ybbxrq, naq fnj gur xvat naq uvf freinagf pbzvat ba
gbjneq uvz: naq Nenhanu jrag bhg, naq objrq uvzfrys orsber gur xvat ba
uvf snpr hcba gur tebhaq.

24:21 Naq Nenhanu fnvq, Jurersber vf zl ybeq gur xvat pbzr gb uvf
freinag?  Naq Qnivq fnvq, Gb ohl gur guerfuvatsybbe bs gurr, gb ohvyq
na nygne hagb gur YBEQ, gung gur cynthr znl or fgnlrq sebz gur crbcyr.

24:22 Naq Nenhanu fnvq hagb Qnivq, Yrg zl ybeq gur xvat gnxr naq bssre
hc jung frrzrgu tbbq hagb uvz: orubyq, urer or bkra sbe oheag
fnpevsvpr, naq guerfuvat vafgehzragf naq bgure vafgehzragf bs gur bkra
sbe jbbq.

24:23 Nyy gurfr guvatf qvq Nenhanu, nf n xvat, tvir hagb gur xvat. Naq
Nenhanu fnvq hagb gur xvat, Gur YBEQ gul Tbq npprcg gurr.

24:24 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb Nenhanu, Anl; ohg V jvyy fheryl ohl vg bs
gurr ng n cevpr: arvgure jvyy V bssre oheag bssrevatf hagb gur YBEQ zl
Tbq bs gung juvpu qbgu pbfg zr abguvat. Fb Qnivq obhtug gur
guerfuvatsybbe naq gur bkra sbe svsgl furxryf bs fvyire.

24:25 Naq Qnivq ohvyg gurer na nygne hagb gur YBEQ, naq bssrerq oheag
bssrevatf naq crnpr bssrevatf. Fb gur YBEQ jnf vagerngrq sbe gur ynaq,
naq gur cynthr jnf fgnlrq sebz Vfenry.




Gur Svefg Obbx bs gur Xvatf

Pbzzbayl Pnyyrq:

Gur Guveq Obbx bs gur Xvatf


1:1 Abj xvat Qnivq jnf byq naq fgevpxra va lrnef; naq gurl pbirerq
uvz jvgu pybgurf, ohg ur tng ab urng.

1:2 Jurersber uvf freinagf fnvq hagb uvz, Yrg gurer or fbhtug sbe zl
ybeq gur xvat n lbhat ivetva: naq yrg ure fgnaq orsber gur xvat, naq
yrg ure purevfu uvz, naq yrg ure yvr va gul obfbz, gung zl ybeq gur
xvat znl trg urng.

1:3 Fb gurl fbhtug sbe n snve qnzfry guebhtubhg nyy gur pbnfgf bs
Vfenry, naq sbhaq Novfunt n Fuhanzzvgr, naq oebhtug ure gb gur xvat.

1:4 Naq gur qnzfry jnf irel snve, naq purevfurq gur xvat, naq
zvavfgrerq gb uvz: ohg gur xvat xarj ure abg.

1:5 Gura Nqbavwnu gur fba bs Unttvgu rknygrq uvzfrys, fnlvat, V jvyy
or xvat: naq ur cercnerq uvz punevbgf naq ubefrzra, naq svsgl zra gb
eha orsber uvz.

1:6 Naq uvf sngure unq abg qvfcyrnfrq uvz ng nal gvzr va fnlvat, Jul
unfg gubh qbar fb? naq ur nyfb jnf n irel tbbqyl zna; naq uvf zbgure
oner uvz nsgre Nofnybz.

1:7 Naq ur pbasreerq jvgu Wbno gur fba bs Mrehvnu, naq jvgu Novngune
gur cevrfg: naq gurl sbyybjvat Nqbavwnu urycrq uvz.

1:8 Ohg Mnqbx gur cevrfg, naq Oranvnu gur fba bs Wrubvnqn, naq Anguna
gur cebcurg, naq Fuvzrv, naq Erv, naq gur zvtugl zra juvpu orybatrq gb
Qnivq, jrer abg jvgu Nqbavwnu.

1:9 Naq Nqbavwnu fyrj furrc naq bkra naq sng pnggyr ol gur fgbar bs
Mburyrgu, juvpu vf ol Raebtry, naq pnyyrq nyy uvf oerguera gur xvat'f
fbaf, naq nyy gur zra bs Whqnu gur xvat'f freinagf: 1:10 Ohg Anguna
gur cebcurg, naq Oranvnu, naq gur zvtugl zra, naq Fbybzba uvf oebgure,
ur pnyyrq abg.

1:11 Jurersber Anguna fcnxr hagb Ongufuron gur zbgure bs Fbybzba,
fnlvat, Unfg gubh abg urneq gung Nqbavwnu gur fba bs Unttvgu qbgu
ervta, naq Qnivq bhe ybeq xabjrgu vg abg?  1:12 Abj gurersber pbzr,
yrg zr, V cenl gurr, tvir gurr pbhafry, gung gubh znlrfg fnir guvar
bja yvsr, naq gur yvsr bs gul fba Fbybzba.

1:13 Tb naq trg gurr va hagb xvat Qnivq, naq fnl hagb uvz, Qvqfg abg
gubh, zl ybeq, B xvat, fjrne hagb guvar unaqznvq, fnlvat, Nffherqyl
Fbybzba gul fba funyy ervta nsgre zr, naq ur funyy fvg hcba zl guebar?
jul gura qbgu Nqbavwnu ervta?  1:14 Orubyq, juvyr gubh lrg gnyxrfg
gurer jvgu gur xvat, V nyfb jvyy pbzr va nsgre gurr, naq pbasvez gul
jbeqf.

1:15 Naq Ongufuron jrag va hagb gur xvat vagb gur punzore: naq gur
xvat jnf irel byq; naq Novfunt gur Fuhanzzvgr zvavfgrerq hagb gur
xvat.

1:16 Naq Ongufuron objrq, naq qvq borvfnapr hagb gur xvat. Naq gur
xvat fnvq, Jung jbhyqrfg gubh?  1:17 Naq fur fnvq hagb uvz, Zl ybeq,
gubh fjnerfg ol gur YBEQ gul Tbq hagb guvar unaqznvq, fnlvat,
Nffherqyl Fbybzba gul fba funyy ervta nsgre zr, naq ur funyy fvg hcba
zl guebar.

1:18 Naq abj, orubyq, Nqbavwnu ervtargu; naq abj, zl ybeq gur xvat,
gubh xabjrfg vg abg: 1:19 Naq ur ungu fynva bkra naq sng pnggyr naq
furrc va nohaqnapr, naq ungu pnyyrq nyy gur fbaf bs gur xvat, naq
Novngune gur cevrfg, naq Wbno gur pncgnva bs gur ubfg: ohg Fbybzba gul
freinag ungu ur abg pnyyrq.

1:20 Naq gubh, zl ybeq, B xvat, gur rlrf bs nyy Vfenry ner hcba gurr,
gung gubh fubhyqrfg gryy gurz jub funyy fvg ba gur guebar bs zl ybeq
gur xvat nsgre uvz.

1:21 Bgurejvfr vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, jura zl ybeq gur xvat funyy
fyrrc jvgu uvf snguref, gung V naq zl fba Fbybzba funyy or pbhagrq
bssraqref.

1:22 Naq, yb, juvyr fur lrg gnyxrq jvgu gur xvat, Anguna gur cebcurg
nyfb pnzr va.

1:23 Naq gurl gbyq gur xvat, fnlvat, Orubyq Anguna gur cebcurg. Naq
jura ur jnf pbzr va orsber gur xvat, ur objrq uvzfrys orsber gur xvat
jvgu uvf snpr gb gur tebhaq.

1:24 Naq Anguna fnvq, Zl ybeq, B xvat, unfg gubh fnvq, Nqbavwnu funyy
ervta nsgre zr, naq ur funyy fvg hcba zl guebar?  1:25 Sbe ur vf tbar
qbja guvf qnl, naq ungu fynva bkra naq sng pnggyr naq furrc va
nohaqnapr, naq ungu pnyyrq nyy gur xvat'f fbaf, naq gur pncgnvaf bs
gur ubfg, naq Novngune gur cevrfg; naq, orubyq, gurl rng naq qevax
orsber uvz, naq fnl, Tbq fnir xvat Nqbavwnu.

1:26 Ohg zr, rira zr gul freinag, naq Mnqbx gur cevrfg, naq Oranvnu
gur fba bs Wrubvnqn, naq gul freinag Fbybzba, ungu ur abg pnyyrq.

1:27 Vf guvf guvat qbar ol zl ybeq gur xvat, naq gubh unfg abg furjrq
vg hagb gul freinag, jub fubhyq fvg ba gur guebar bs zl ybeq gur xvat
nsgre uvz?  1:28 Gura xvat Qnivq nafjrerq naq fnvq, Pnyy zr Ongufuron.
Naq fur pnzr vagb gur xvat'f cerfrapr, naq fgbbq orsber gur xvat.

1:29 Naq gur xvat fjner, naq fnvq, Nf gur YBEQ yvirgu, gung ungu
erqrrzrq zl fbhy bhg bs nyy qvfgerff, 1:30 Rira nf V fjner hagb gurr
ol gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Nffherqyl Fbybzba gul fba funyy
ervta nsgre zr, naq ur funyy fvg hcba zl guebar va zl fgrnq; rira fb
jvyy V pregnvayl qb guvf qnl.

1:31 Gura Ongufuron objrq jvgu ure snpr gb gur rnegu, naq qvq
erirerapr gb gur xvat, naq fnvq, Yrg zl ybeq xvat Qnivq yvir sbe rire.

1:32 Naq xvat Qnivq fnvq, Pnyy zr Mnqbx gur cevrfg, naq Anguna gur
cebcurg, naq Oranvnu gur fba bs Wrubvnqn. Naq gurl pnzr orsber gur
xvat.

1:33 Gur xvat nyfb fnvq hagb gurz, Gnxr jvgu lbh gur freinagf bs lbhe
ybeq, naq pnhfr Fbybzba zl fba gb evqr hcba zvar bja zhyr, naq oevat
uvz qbja gb Tvuba: 1:34 Naq yrg Mnqbx gur cevrfg naq Anguna gur
cebcurg nabvag uvz gurer xvat bire Vfenry: naq oybj lr jvgu gur
gehzcrg, naq fnl, Tbq fnir xvat Fbybzba.

1:35 Gura lr funyy pbzr hc nsgre uvz, gung ur znl pbzr naq fvg hcba zl
guebar; sbe ur funyy or xvat va zl fgrnq: naq V unir nccbvagrq uvz gb
or ehyre bire Vfenry naq bire Whqnu.

1:36 Naq Oranvnu gur fba bs Wrubvnqn nafjrerq gur xvat, naq fnvq,
Nzra: gur YBEQ Tbq bs zl ybeq gur xvat fnl fb gbb.

1:37 Nf gur YBEQ ungu orra jvgu zl ybeq gur xvat, rira fb or ur jvgu
Fbybzba, naq znxr uvf guebar terngre guna gur guebar bs zl ybeq xvat
Qnivq.

1:38 Fb Mnqbx gur cevrfg, naq Anguna gur cebcurg, naq Oranvnu gur fba
bs Wrubvnqn, naq gur Purerguvgrf, naq gur Cryrguvgrf, jrag qbja, naq
pnhfrq Fbybzba gb evqr hcba xvat Qnivq'f zhyr, naq oebhtug uvz gb
Tvuba.

1:39 Naq Mnqbx gur cevrfg gbbx na ubea bs bvy bhg bs gur gnoreanpyr,
naq nabvagrq Fbybzba. Naq gurl oyrj gur gehzcrg; naq nyy gur crbcyr
fnvq, Tbq fnir xvat Fbybzba.

1:40 Naq nyy gur crbcyr pnzr hc nsgre uvz, naq gur crbcyr cvcrq jvgu
cvcrf, naq erwbvprq jvgu terng wbl, fb gung gur rnegu erag jvgu gur
fbhaq bs gurz.

1:41 Naq Nqbavwnu naq nyy gur thrfgf gung jrer jvgu uvz urneq vg nf
gurl unq znqr na raq bs rngvat. Naq jura Wbno urneq gur fbhaq bs gur
gehzcrg, ur fnvq, Jurersber vf guvf abvfr bs gur pvgl orvat va na
hcebne?  1:42 Naq juvyr ur lrg fcnxr, orubyq, Wbanguna gur fba bs
Novngune gur cevrfg pnzr; naq Nqbavwnu fnvq hagb uvz, Pbzr va; sbe
gubh neg n inyvnag zna, naq oevatrfg tbbq gvqvatf.

1:43 Naq Wbanguna nafjrerq naq fnvq gb Nqbavwnu, Irevyl bhe ybeq xvat
Qnivq ungu znqr Fbybzba xvat.

1:44 Naq gur xvat ungu frag jvgu uvz Mnqbx gur cevrfg, naq Anguna gur
cebcurg, naq Oranvnu gur fba bs Wrubvnqn, naq gur Purerguvgrf, naq gur
Cryrguvgrf, naq gurl unir pnhfrq uvz gb evqr hcba gur xvat'f zhyr:
1:45 Naq Mnqbx gur cevrfg naq Anguna gur cebcurg unir nabvagrq uvz
xvat va Tvuba: naq gurl ner pbzr hc sebz gurapr erwbvpvat, fb gung gur
pvgl enat ntnva. Guvf vf gur abvfr gung lr unir urneq.

1:46 Naq nyfb Fbybzba fvggrgu ba gur guebar bs gur xvatqbz.

1:47 Naq zberbire gur xvat'f freinagf pnzr gb oyrff bhe ybeq xvat
Qnivq, fnlvat, Tbq znxr gur anzr bs Fbybzba orggre guna gul anzr, naq
znxr uvf guebar terngre guna gul guebar. Naq gur xvat objrq uvzfrys
hcba gur orq.

1:48 Naq nyfb guhf fnvq gur xvat, Oyrffrq or gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry,
juvpu ungu tvira bar gb fvg ba zl guebar guvf qnl, zvar rlrf rira
frrvat vg.

1:49 Naq nyy gur thrfgf gung jrer jvgu Nqbavwnu jrer nsenvq, naq ebfr
hc, naq jrag rirel zna uvf jnl.

1:50 Naq Nqbavwnu srnerq orpnhfr bs Fbybzba, naq nebfr, naq jrag, naq
pnhtug ubyq ba gur ubeaf bs gur nygne.

1:51 Naq vg jnf gbyq Fbybzba, fnlvat, Orubyq, Nqbavwnu srnergu xvat
Fbybzba: sbe, yb, ur ungu pnhtug ubyq ba gur ubeaf bs gur nygne,
fnlvat, Yrg xvat Fbybzba fjrne hagb zr gbqnl gung ur jvyy abg fynl uvf
freinag jvgu gur fjbeq.

1:52 Naq Fbybzba fnvq, Vs ur jvyy furj uvzfrys n jbegul zna, gurer
funyy abg na unve bs uvz snyy gb gur rnegu: ohg vs jvpxrqarff funyy or
sbhaq va uvz, ur funyy qvr.

1:53 Fb xvat Fbybzba frag, naq gurl oebhtug uvz qbja sebz gur nygne.
Naq ur pnzr naq objrq uvzfrys gb xvat Fbybzba: naq Fbybzba fnvq hagb
uvz, Tb gb guvar ubhfr.

2:1 Abj gur qnlf bs Qnivq qerj avtu gung ur fubhyq qvr; naq ur punetrq
Fbybzba uvf fba, fnlvat, 2:2 V tb gur jnl bs nyy gur rnegu: or gubh
fgebat gurersber, naq furj gulfrys n zna; 2:3 Naq xrrc gur punetr bs
gur YBEQ gul Tbq, gb jnyx va uvf jnlf, gb xrrc uvf fgnghgrf, naq uvf
pbzznaqzragf, naq uvf whqtzragf, naq uvf grfgvzbavrf, nf vg vf jevggra
va gur ynj bs Zbfrf, gung gubh znlrfg cebfcre va nyy gung gubh qbrfg,
naq juvgurefbrire gubh ghearfg gulfrys: 2:4 Gung gur YBEQ znl pbagvahr
uvf jbeq juvpu ur fcnxr pbapreavat zr, fnlvat, Vs gul puvyqera gnxr
urrq gb gurve jnl, gb jnyx orsber zr va gehgu jvgu nyy gurve urneg naq
jvgu nyy gurve fbhy, gurer funyy abg snvy gurr (fnvq ur) n zna ba gur
guebar bs Vfenry.

2:5 Zberbire gubh xabjrfg nyfb jung Wbno gur fba bs Mrehvnu qvq gb zr,
naq jung ur qvq gb gur gjb pncgnvaf bs gur ubfgf bs Vfenry, hagb Noare
gur fba bs Are, naq hagb Nznfn gur fba bs Wrgure, jubz ur fyrj, naq
furq gur oybbq bs jne va crnpr, naq chg gur oybbq bs jne hcba uvf
tveqyr gung jnf nobhg uvf ybvaf, naq va uvf fubrf gung jrer ba uvf
srrg.

2:6 Qb gurersber nppbeqvat gb gul jvfqbz, naq yrg abg uvf ubne urnq tb
qbja gb gur tenir va crnpr.

2:7 Ohg furj xvaqarff hagb gur fbaf bs Onemvyynv gur Tvyrnqvgr, naq
yrg gurz or bs gubfr gung rng ng gul gnoyr: sbe fb gurl pnzr gb zr
jura V syrq orpnhfr bs Nofnybz gul oebgure.

2:8 Naq, orubyq, gubh unfg jvgu gurr Fuvzrv gur fba bs Tren, n
Orawnzvgr bs Onuhevz, juvpu phefrq zr jvgu n tevribhf phefr va gur qnl
jura V jrag gb Znunanvz: ohg ur pnzr qbja gb zrrg zr ng Wbeqna, naq V
fjner gb uvz ol gur YBEQ, fnlvat, V jvyy abg chg gurr gb qrngu jvgu
gur fjbeq.

2:9 Abj gurersber ubyq uvz abg thvygyrff: sbe gubh neg n jvfr zna, naq
xabjrfg jung gubh bhtugrfg gb qb hagb uvz; ohg uvf ubne urnq oevat
gubh qbja gb gur tenir jvgu oybbq.

2:10 Fb Qnivq fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq jnf ohevrq va gur pvgl bs
Qnivq.

2:11 Naq gur qnlf gung Qnivq ervtarq bire Vfenry jrer sbegl lrnef:
frira lrnef ervtarq ur va Uroeba, naq guvegl naq guerr lrnef ervtarq
ur va Wrehfnyrz.

2:12 Gura fng Fbybzba hcba gur guebar bs Qnivq uvf sngure; naq uvf
xvatqbz jnf rfgnoyvfurq terngyl.

2:13 Naq Nqbavwnu gur fba bs Unttvgu pnzr gb Ongufuron gur zbgure bs
Fbybzba. Naq fur fnvq, Pbzrfg gubh crnprnoyl? Naq ur fnvq, Crnprnoyl.

2:14 Ur fnvq zberbire, V unir fbzrjung gb fnl hagb gurr. Naq fur fnvq,
Fnl ba.

2:15 Naq ur fnvq, Gubh xabjrfg gung gur xvatqbz jnf zvar, naq gung nyy
Vfenry frg gurve snprf ba zr, gung V fubhyq ervta: ubjorvg gur xvatqbz
vf ghearq nobhg, naq vf orpbzr zl oebgure'f: sbe vg jnf uvf sebz gur
YBEQ.

2:16 Naq abj V nfx bar crgvgvba bs gurr, qral zr abg. Naq fur fnvq
hagb uvz, Fnl ba.

2:17 Naq ur fnvq, Fcrnx, V cenl gurr, hagb Fbybzba gur xvat, (sbe ur
jvyy abg fnl gurr anl,) gung ur tvir zr Novfunt gur Fuhanzzvgr gb
jvsr.

2:18 Naq Ongufuron fnvq, Jryy; V jvyy fcrnx sbe gurr hagb gur xvat.

2:19 Ongufuron gurersber jrag hagb xvat Fbybzba, gb fcrnx hagb uvz sbe
Nqbavwnu. Naq gur xvat ebfr hc gb zrrg ure, naq objrq uvzfrys hagb
ure, naq fng qbja ba uvf guebar, naq pnhfrq n frng gb or frg sbe gur
xvat'f zbgure; naq fur fng ba uvf evtug unaq.

2:20 Gura fur fnvq, V qrfver bar fznyy crgvgvba bs gurr; V cenl gurr,
fnl zr abg anl. Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb ure, Nfx ba, zl zbgure: sbe V
jvyy abg fnl gurr anl.

2:21 Naq fur fnvq, Yrg Novfunt gur Fuhanzzvgr or tvira gb Nqbavwnu gul
oebgure gb jvsr.

2:22 Naq xvat Fbybzba nafjrerq naq fnvq hagb uvf zbgure, Naq jul qbfg
gubh nfx Novfunt gur Fuhanzzvgr sbe Nqbavwnu? nfx sbe uvz gur xvatqbz
nyfb; sbe ur vf zvar ryqre oebgure; rira sbe uvz, naq sbe Novngune gur
cevrfg, naq sbe Wbno gur fba bs Mrehvnu.

2:23 Gura xvat Fbybzba fjner ol gur YBEQ, fnlvat, Tbq qb fb gb zr, naq
zber nyfb, vs Nqbavwnu unir abg fcbxra guvf jbeq ntnvafg uvf bja yvsr.

2:24 Abj gurersber, nf gur YBEQ yvirgu, juvpu ungu rfgnoyvfurq zr, naq
frg zr ba gur guebar bs Qnivq zl sngure, naq jub ungu znqr zr na
ubhfr, nf ur cebzvfrq, Nqbavwnu funyy or chg gb qrngu guvf qnl.

2:25 Naq xvat Fbybzba frag ol gur unaq bs Oranvnu gur fba bs Wrubvnqn;
naq ur sryy hcba uvz gung ur qvrq.

2:26 Naq hagb Novngune gur cevrfg fnvq gur xvat, Trg gurr gb Nangubgu,
hagb guvar bja svryqf; sbe gubh neg jbegul bs qrngu: ohg V jvyy abg ng
guvf gvzr chg gurr gb qrngu, orpnhfr gubh onerfg gur nex bs gur YBEQ
Tbq orsber Qnivq zl sngure, naq orpnhfr gubh unfg orra nssyvpgrq va
nyy jurerva zl sngure jnf nssyvpgrq.

2:27 Fb Fbybzba guehfg bhg Novngune sebz orvat cevrfg hagb gur YBEQ;
gung ur zvtug shysvy gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ, juvpu ur fcnxr pbapreavat
gur ubhfr bs Ryv va Fuvybu.

2:28 Gura gvqvatf pnzr gb Wbno: sbe Wbno unq ghearq nsgre Nqbavwnu,
gubhtu ur ghearq abg nsgre Nofnybz. Naq Wbno syrq hagb gur gnoreanpyr
bs gur YBEQ, naq pnhtug ubyq ba gur ubeaf bs gur nygne.

2:29 Naq vg jnf gbyq xvat Fbybzba gung Wbno jnf syrq hagb gur
gnoreanpyr bs gur YBEQ; naq, orubyq, ur vf ol gur nygne. Gura Fbybzba
frag Oranvnu gur fba bs Wrubvnqn, fnlvat, Tb, snyy hcba uvz.

2:30 Naq Oranvnu pnzr gb gur gnoreanpyr bs gur YBEQ, naq fnvq hagb
uvz, Guhf fnvgu gur xvat, Pbzr sbegu. Naq ur fnvq, Anl; ohg V jvyy qvr
urer. Naq Oranvnu oebhtug gur xvat jbeq ntnva, fnlvat, Guhf fnvq Wbno,
naq guhf ur nafjrerq zr.

2:31 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb uvz, Qb nf ur ungu fnvq, naq snyy hcba
uvz, naq ohel uvz; gung gubh znlrfg gnxr njnl gur vaabprag oybbq,
juvpu Wbno furq, sebz zr, naq sebz gur ubhfr bs zl sngure.

2:32 Naq gur YBEQ funyy erghea uvf oybbq hcba uvf bja urnq, jub sryy
hcba gjb zra zber evtugrbhf naq orggre guna ur, naq fyrj gurz jvgu gur
fjbeq, zl sngure Qnivq abg xabjvat gurerbs, gb jvg, Noare gur fba bs
Are, pncgnva bs gur ubfg bs Vfenry, naq Nznfn gur fba bs Wrgure,
pncgnva bs gur ubfg bs Whqnu.

2:33 Gurve oybbq funyy gurersber erghea hcba gur urnq bs Wbno, naq
hcba gur urnq bs uvf frrq sbe rire: ohg hcba Qnivq, naq hcba uvf frrq,
naq hcba uvf ubhfr, naq hcba uvf guebar, funyy gurer or crnpr sbe rire
sebz gur YBEQ.

2:34 Fb Oranvnu gur fba bs Wrubvnqn jrag hc, naq sryy hcba uvz, naq
fyrj uvz: naq ur jnf ohevrq va uvf bja ubhfr va gur jvyqrearff.

2:35 Naq gur xvat chg Oranvnu gur fba bs Wrubvnqn va uvf ebbz bire gur
ubfg: naq Mnqbx gur cevrfg qvq gur xvat chg va gur ebbz bs Novngune.

2:36 Naq gur xvat frag naq pnyyrq sbe Fuvzrv, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Ohvyq
gurr na ubhfr va Wrehfnyrz, naq qjryy gurer, naq tb abg sbegu gurapr
nal juvgure.

2:37 Sbe vg funyy or, gung ba gur qnl gubh tbrfg bhg, naq cnffrfg bire
gur oebbx Xvqeba, gubh funyg xabj sbe pregnva gung gubh funyg fheryl
qvr: gul oybbq funyy or hcba guvar bja urnq.

2:38 Naq Fuvzrv fnvq hagb gur xvat, Gur fnlvat vf tbbq: nf zl ybeq gur
xvat ungu fnvq, fb jvyy gul freinag qb. Naq Fuvzrv qjryg va Wrehfnyrz
znal qnlf.

2:39 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng gur raq bs guerr lrnef, gung gjb bs gur
freinagf bs Fuvzrv ena njnl hagb Npuvfu fba bs Znnpunu xvat bs Tngu.
Naq gurl gbyq Fuvzrv, fnlvat, Orubyq, gul freinagf or va Tngu.

2:40 Naq Fuvzrv nebfr, naq fnqqyrq uvf nff, naq jrag gb Tngu gb Npuvfu
gb frrx uvf freinagf: naq Fuvzrv jrag, naq oebhtug uvf freinagf sebz
Tngu.

2:41 Naq vg jnf gbyq Fbybzba gung Fuvzrv unq tbar sebz Wrehfnyrz gb
Tngu, naq jnf pbzr ntnva.

2:42 Naq gur xvat frag naq pnyyrq sbe Fuvzrv, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Qvq V
abg znxr gurr gb fjrne ol gur YBEQ, naq cebgrfgrq hagb gurr, fnlvat,
Xabj sbe n pregnva, ba gur qnl gubh tbrfg bhg, naq jnyxrfg noebnq nal
juvgure, gung gubh funyg fheryl qvr? naq gubh fnvqfg hagb zr, Gur jbeq
gung V unir urneq vf tbbq.

2:43 Jul gura unfg gubh abg xrcg gur bngu bs gur YBEQ, naq gur
pbzznaqzrag gung V unir punetrq gurr jvgu?  2:44 Gur xvat fnvq
zberbire gb Fuvzrv, Gubh xabjrfg nyy gur jvpxrqarff juvpu guvar urneg
vf cevil gb, gung gubh qvqfg gb Qnivq zl sngure: gurersber gur YBEQ
funyy erghea gul jvpxrqarff hcba guvar bja urnq; 2:45 Naq xvat Fbybzba
funyy or oyrffrq, naq gur guebar bs Qnivq funyy or rfgnoyvfurq orsber
gur YBEQ sbe rire.

2:46 Fb gur xvat pbzznaqrq Oranvnu gur fba bs Wrubvnqn; juvpu jrag
bhg, naq sryy hcba uvz, gung ur qvrq. Naq gur xvatqbz jnf rfgnoyvfurq
va gur unaq bs Fbybzba.

3:1 Naq Fbybzba znqr nssvavgl jvgu Cunenbu xvat bs Rtlcg, naq gbbx
Cunenbu'f qnhtugre, naq oebhtug ure vagb gur pvgl bs Qnivq, hagvy ur
unq znqr na raq bs ohvyqvat uvf bja ubhfr, naq gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ,
naq gur jnyy bs Wrehfnyrz ebhaq nobhg.

3:2 Bayl gur crbcyr fnpevsvprq va uvtu cynprf, orpnhfr gurer jnf ab
ubhfr ohvyg hagb gur anzr bs gur YBEQ, hagvy gubfr qnlf.

3:3 Naq Fbybzba ybirq gur YBEQ, jnyxvat va gur fgnghgrf bs Qnivq uvf
sngure: bayl ur fnpevsvprq naq oheag vaprafr va uvtu cynprf.

3:4 Naq gur xvat jrag gb Tvorba gb fnpevsvpr gurer; sbe gung jnf gur
terng uvtu cynpr: n gubhfnaq oheag bssrevatf qvq Fbybzba bssre hcba
gung nygne.

3:5 Va Tvorba gur YBEQ nccrnerq gb Fbybzba va n qernz ol avtug: naq
Tbq fnvq, Nfx jung V funyy tvir gurr.

3:6 Naq Fbybzba fnvq, Gubh unfg furjrq hagb gul freinag Qnivq zl
sngure terng zrepl, nppbeqvat nf ur jnyxrq orsber gurr va gehgu, naq
va evtugrbhfarff, naq va hcevtugarff bs urneg jvgu gurr; naq gubh unfg
xrcg sbe uvz guvf terng xvaqarff, gung gubh unfg tvira uvz n fba gb
fvg ba uvf guebar, nf vg vf guvf qnl.

3:7 Naq abj, B YBEQ zl Tbq, gubh unfg znqr gul freinag xvat vafgrnq bs
Qnivq zl sngure: naq V nz ohg n yvggyr puvyq: V xabj abg ubj gb tb bhg
be pbzr va.

3:8 Naq gul freinag vf va gur zvqfg bs gul crbcyr juvpu gubh unfg
pubfra, n terng crbcyr, gung pnaabg or ahzorerq abe pbhagrq sbe
zhygvghqr.

3:9 Tvir gurersber gul freinag na haqrefgnaqvat urneg gb whqtr gul
crbcyr, gung V znl qvfprea orgjrra tbbq naq onq: sbe jub vf noyr gb
whqtr guvf gul fb terng n crbcyr?  3:10 Naq gur fcrrpu cyrnfrq gur
YBEQ, gung Fbybzba unq nfxrq guvf guvat.

3:11 Naq Tbq fnvq hagb uvz, Orpnhfr gubh unfg nfxrq guvf guvat, naq
unfg abg nfxrq sbe gulfrys ybat yvsr; arvgure unfg nfxrq evpurf sbe
gulfrys, abe unfg nfxrq gur yvsr bs guvar rarzvrf; ohg unfg nfxrq sbe
gulfrys haqrefgnaqvat gb qvfprea whqtzrag; 3:12 Orubyq, V unir qbar
nppbeqvat gb gul jbeqf: yb, V unir tvira gurr n jvfr naq na
haqrefgnaqvat urneg; fb gung gurer jnf abar yvxr gurr orsber gurr,
arvgure nsgre gurr funyy nal nevfr yvxr hagb gurr.

3:13 Naq V unir nyfb tvira gurr gung juvpu gubh unfg abg nfxrq, obgu
evpurf, naq ubabhe: fb gung gurer funyy abg or nal nzbat gur xvatf
yvxr hagb gurr nyy gul qnlf.

3:14 Naq vs gubh jvyg jnyx va zl jnlf, gb xrrc zl fgnghgrf naq zl
pbzznaqzragf, nf gul sngure Qnivq qvq jnyx, gura V jvyy yratgura gul
qnlf.

3:15 Naq Fbybzba njbxr; naq, orubyq, vg jnf n qernz. Naq ur pnzr gb
Wrehfnyrz, naq fgbbq orsber gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ, naq
bssrerq hc oheag bssrevatf, naq bssrerq crnpr bssrevatf, naq znqr n
srnfg gb nyy uvf freinagf.

3:16 Gura pnzr gurer gjb jbzra, gung jrer uneybgf, hagb gur xvat, naq
fgbbq orsber uvz.

3:17 Naq gur bar jbzna fnvq, B zl ybeq, V naq guvf jbzna qjryy va bar
ubhfr; naq V jnf qryvirerq bs n puvyq jvgu ure va gur ubhfr.

3:18 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff gur guveq qnl nsgre gung V jnf qryvirerq,
gung guvf jbzna jnf qryvirerq nyfb: naq jr jrer gbtrgure; gurer jnf ab
fgenatre jvgu hf va gur ubhfr, fnir jr gjb va gur ubhfr.

3:19 Naq guvf jbzna'f puvyq qvrq va gur avtug; orpnhfr fur bireynvq
vg.

3:20 Naq fur nebfr ng zvqavtug, naq gbbx zl fba sebz orfvqr zr, juvyr
guvar unaqznvq fyrcg, naq ynvq vg va ure obfbz, naq ynvq ure qrnq
puvyq va zl obfbz.

3:21 Naq jura V ebfr va gur zbeavat gb tvir zl puvyq fhpx, orubyq, vg
jnf qrnq: ohg jura V unq pbafvqrerq vg va gur zbeavat, orubyq, vg jnf
abg zl fba, juvpu V qvq orne.

3:22 Naq gur bgure jbzna fnvq, Anl; ohg gur yvivat vf zl fba, naq gur
qrnq vf gul fba. Naq guvf fnvq, Ab; ohg gur qrnq vf gul fba, naq gur
yvivat vf zl fba. Guhf gurl fcnxr orsber gur xvat.

3:23 Gura fnvq gur xvat, Gur bar fnvgu, Guvf vf zl fba gung yvirgu,
naq gul fba vf gur qrnq: naq gur bgure fnvgu, Anl; ohg gul fba vf gur
qrnq, naq zl fba vf gur yvivat.

3:24 Naq gur xvat fnvq, Oevat zr n fjbeq. Naq gurl oebhtug n fjbeq
orsber gur xvat.

3:25 Naq gur xvat fnvq, Qvivqr gur yvivat puvyq va gjb, naq tvir unys
gb gur bar, naq unys gb gur bgure.

3:26 Gura fcnxr gur jbzna jubfr gur yvivat puvyq jnf hagb gur xvat,
sbe ure objryf lrnearq hcba ure fba, naq fur fnvq, B zl ybeq, tvir ure
gur yvivat puvyq, naq va ab jvfr fynl vg. Ohg gur bgure fnvq, Yrg vg
or arvgure zvar abe guvar, ohg qvivqr vg.

3:27 Gura gur xvat nafjrerq naq fnvq, Tvir ure gur yvivat puvyq, naq
va ab jvfr fynl vg: fur vf gur zbgure gurerbs.

3:28 Naq nyy Vfenry urneq bs gur whqtzrag juvpu gur xvat unq whqtrq;
naq gurl srnerq gur xvat: sbe gurl fnj gung gur jvfqbz bs Tbq jnf va
uvz, gb qb whqtzrag.

4:1 Fb xvat Fbybzba jnf xvat bire nyy Vfenry.

4:2 Naq gurfr jrer gur cevaprf juvpu ur unq; Nmnevnu gur fba bs Mnqbx
gur cevrfg, 4:3 Ryvubercu naq Nuvnu, gur fbaf bs Fuvfun, fpevorf;
Wrubfuncung gur fba bs Nuvyhq, gur erpbeqre.

4:4 Naq Oranvnu gur fba bs Wrubvnqn jnf bire gur ubfg: naq Mnqbx naq
Novngune jrer gur cevrfgf: 4:5 Naq Nmnevnu gur fba bs Anguna jnf bire
gur bssvpref: naq Mnohq gur fba bs Anguna jnf cevapvcny bssvpre, naq
gur xvat'f sevraq: 4:6 Naq Nuvfune jnf bire gur ubhfrubyq: naq
Nqbavenz gur fba bs Noqn jnf bire gur gevohgr.

4:7 Naq Fbybzba unq gjryir bssvpref bire nyy Vfenry, juvpu cebivqrq
ivpghnyf sbe gur xvat naq uvf ubhfrubyq: rnpu zna uvf zbagu va n lrne
znqr cebivfvba.

4:8 Naq gurfr ner gurve anzrf: Gur fba bs Uhe, va zbhag Rcuenvz: 4:9
Gur fba bs Qrxne, va Znxnm, naq va Funnyovz, naq Orgufurzrfu, naq
Rybaorguunana: 4:10 Gur fba bs Urfrq, va Nehobgu; gb uvz cregnvarq
Fbpubu, naq nyy gur ynaq bs Urcure: 4:11 Gur fba bs Novanqno, va nyy
gur ertvba bs Qbe; juvpu unq Gncungu gur qnhtugre bs Fbybzba gb jvsr:
4:12 Onnan gur fba bs Nuvyhq; gb uvz cregnvarq Gnnanpu naq Zrtvqqb,
naq nyy Orgufurna, juvpu vf ol Mnegnanu orarngu Wrmerry, sebz
Orgufurna gb Noryzrubynu, rira hagb gur cynpr gung vf orlbaq Wbxarnz:
4:13 Gur fba bs Trore, va Enzbgutvyrnq; gb uvz cregnvarq gur gbjaf bs
Wnve gur fba bs Znanffru, juvpu ner va Tvyrnq; gb uvz nyfb cregnvarq
gur ertvba bs Netbo, juvpu vf va Onfuna, guerrfpber terng pvgvrf jvgu
jnyyf naq oenfra onef: 4:14 Nuvanqno gur fba bs Vqqb unq Znunanvz:
4:15 Nuvznnm jnf va Ancugnyv; ur nyfb gbbx Onfzngu gur qnhtugre bs
Fbybzba gb jvsr: 4:16 Onnanu gur fba bs Uhfunv jnf va Nfure naq va
Nybgu: 4:17 Wrubfuncung gur fba bs Cnehnu, va Vffnpune: 4:18 Fuvzrv
gur fba bs Rynu, va Orawnzva: 4:19 Trore gur fba bs Hev jnf va gur
pbhagel bs Tvyrnq, va gur pbhagel bs Fvuba xvat bs gur Nzbevgrf, naq
bs Bt xvat bs Onfuna; naq ur jnf gur bayl bssvpre juvpu jnf va gur
ynaq.

4:20 Whqnu naq Vfenry jrer znal, nf gur fnaq juvpu vf ol gur frn va
zhygvghqr, rngvat naq qevaxvat, naq znxvat zreel.

4:21 Naq Fbybzba ervtarq bire nyy xvatqbzf sebz gur evire hagb gur
ynaq bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf, naq hagb gur obeqre bs Rtlcg: gurl oebhtug
cerfragf, naq freirq Fbybzba nyy gur qnlf bs uvf yvsr.

4:22 Naq Fbybzba'f cebivfvba sbe bar qnl jnf guvegl zrnfherf bs svar
sybhe, naq guerrfpber zrnfherf bs zrny, 4:23 Gra sng bkra, naq gjragl
bkra bhg bs gur cnfgherf, naq na uhaqerq furrc, orfvqr unegf, naq
ebrohpxf, naq snyybjqrre, naq snggrq sbjy.

4:24 Sbe ur unq qbzvavba bire nyy gur ertvba ba guvf fvqr gur evire,
sebz Gvcufnu rira gb Nmmnu, bire nyy gur xvatf ba guvf fvqr gur evire:
naq ur unq crnpr ba nyy fvqrf ebhaq nobhg uvz.

4:25 Naq Whqnu naq Vfenry qjryg fnsryl, rirel zna haqre uvf ivar naq
haqre uvf svt gerr, sebz Qna rira gb Orrefuron, nyy gur qnlf bs
Fbybzba.

4:26 Naq Fbybzba unq sbegl gubhfnaq fgnyyf bs ubefrf sbe uvf punevbgf,
naq gjryir gubhfnaq ubefrzra.

4:27 Naq gubfr bssvpref cebivqrq ivpghny sbe xvat Fbybzba, naq sbe nyy
gung pnzr hagb xvat Fbybzba'f gnoyr, rirel zna va uvf zbagu: gurl
ynpxrq abguvat.

4:28 Oneyrl nyfb naq fgenj sbe gur ubefrf naq qebzrqnevrf oebhtug gurl
hagb gur cynpr jurer gur bssvpref jrer, rirel zna nppbeqvat gb uvf
punetr.

4:29 Naq Tbq tnir Fbybzba jvfqbz naq haqrefgnaqvat rkprrqvat zhpu, naq
ynetrarff bs urneg, rira nf gur fnaq gung vf ba gur frn fuber.

4:30 Naq Fbybzba'f jvfqbz rkpryyrq gur jvfqbz bs nyy gur puvyqera bs
gur rnfg pbhagel, naq nyy gur jvfqbz bs Rtlcg.

4:31 Sbe ur jnf jvfre guna nyy zra; guna Rguna gur Rmenuvgr, naq
Urzna, naq Punypby, naq Qneqn, gur fbaf bs Znuby: naq uvf snzr jnf va
nyy angvbaf ebhaq nobhg.

4:32 Naq ur fcnxr guerr gubhfnaq cebireof: naq uvf fbatf jrer n
gubhfnaq naq svir.

4:33 Naq ur fcnxr bs gerrf, sebz gur prqne gerr gung vf va Yronaba
rira hagb gur ulffbc gung fcevatrgu bhg bs gur jnyy: ur fcnxr nyfb bs
ornfgf, naq bs sbjy, naq bs perrcvat guvatf, naq bs svfurf.

4:34 Naq gurer pnzr bs nyy crbcyr gb urne gur jvfqbz bs Fbybzba, sebz
nyy xvatf bs gur rnegu, juvpu unq urneq bs uvf jvfqbz.

5:1 Naq Uvenz xvat bs Gler frag uvf freinagf hagb Fbybzba; sbe ur unq
urneq gung gurl unq nabvagrq uvz xvat va gur ebbz bs uvf sngure: sbe
Uvenz jnf rire n ybire bs Qnivq.

5:2 Naq Fbybzba frag gb Uvenz, fnlvat, 5:3 Gubh xabjrfg ubj gung Qnivq
zl sngure pbhyq abg ohvyq na ubhfr hagb gur anzr bs gur YBEQ uvf Tbq
sbe gur jnef juvpu jrer nobhg uvz ba rirel fvqr, hagvy gur YBEQ chg
gurz haqre gur fbyrf bs uvf srrg.

5:4 Ohg abj gur YBEQ zl Tbq ungu tvira zr erfg ba rirel fvqr, fb gung
gurer vf arvgure nqirefnel abe rivy bppheerag.

5:5 Naq, orubyq, V checbfr gb ohvyq na ubhfr hagb gur anzr bs gur YBEQ
zl Tbq, nf gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Qnivq zl sngure, fnlvat, Gul fba, jubz
V jvyy frg hcba gul guebar va gul ebbz, ur funyy ohvyq na ubhfr hagb
zl anzr.

5:6 Abj gurersber pbzznaq gubh gung gurl urj zr prqne gerrf bhg bs
Yronaba; naq zl freinagf funyy or jvgu gul freinagf: naq hagb gurr
jvyy V tvir uver sbe gul freinagf nppbeqvat gb nyy gung gubh funyg
nccbvag: sbe gubh xabjrfg gung gurer vf abg nzbat hf nal gung pna
fxvyy gb urj gvzore yvxr hagb gur Fvqbavnaf.

5:7 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Uvenz urneq gur jbeqf bs Fbybzba, gung
ur erwbvprq terngyl, naq fnvq, Oyrffrq or gur YBEQ guvf qnl, juvpu
ungu tvira hagb Qnivq n jvfr fba bire guvf terng crbcyr.

5:8 Naq Uvenz frag gb Fbybzba, fnlvat, V unir pbafvqrerq gur guvatf
juvpu gubh fragrfg gb zr sbe: naq V jvyy qb nyy gul qrfver pbapreavat
gvzore bs prqne, naq pbapreavat gvzore bs sve.

5:9 Zl freinagf funyy oevat gurz qbja sebz Yronaba hagb gur frn: naq V
jvyy pbairl gurz ol frn va sybngf hagb gur cynpr gung gubh funyg
nccbvag zr, naq jvyy pnhfr gurz gb or qvfpunetrq gurer, naq gubh funyg
erprvir gurz: naq gubh funyg nppbzcyvfu zl qrfver, va tvivat sbbq sbe
zl ubhfrubyq.

5:10 Fb Uvenz tnir Fbybzba prqne gerrf naq sve gerrf nppbeqvat gb nyy
uvf qrfver.

5:11 Naq Fbybzba tnir Uvenz gjragl gubhfnaq zrnfherf bs jurng sbe sbbq
gb uvf ubhfrubyq, naq gjragl zrnfherf bs cher bvy: guhf tnir Fbybzba
gb Uvenz lrne ol lrne.

5:12 Naq gur YBEQ tnir Fbybzba jvfqbz, nf ur cebzvfrq uvz: naq gurer
jnf crnpr orgjrra Uvenz naq Fbybzba; naq gurl gjb znqr n yrnthr
gbtrgure.

5:13 Naq xvat Fbybzba envfrq n yril bhg bs nyy Vfenry; naq gur yril
jnf guvegl gubhfnaq zra.

5:14 Naq ur frag gurz gb Yronaba, gra gubhfnaq n zbagu ol pbhefrf: n
zbagu gurl jrer va Yronaba, naq gjb zbaguf ng ubzr: naq Nqbavenz jnf
bire gur yril.

5:15 Naq Fbybzba unq guerrfpber naq gra gubhfnaq gung oner oheqraf,
naq sbhefpber gubhfnaq urjref va gur zbhagnvaf; 5:16 Orfvqr gur puvrs
bs Fbybzba'f bssvpref juvpu jrer bire gur jbex, guerr gubhfnaq naq
guerr uhaqerq, juvpu ehyrq bire gur crbcyr gung jebhtug va gur jbex.

5:17 Naq gur xvat pbzznaqrq, naq gurl oebhtug terng fgbarf, pbfgyl
fgbarf, naq urjrq fgbarf, gb ynl gur sbhaqngvba bs gur ubhfr.

5:18 Naq Fbybzba'f ohvyqref naq Uvenz'f ohvyqref qvq urj gurz, naq gur
fgbarfdhneref: fb gurl cercnerq gvzore naq fgbarf gb ohvyq gur ubhfr.

6:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gur sbhe uhaqerq naq rvtugvrgu lrne nsgre
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jrer pbzr bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, va gur
sbhegu lrne bs Fbybzba'f ervta bire Vfenry, va gur zbagu Mvs, juvpu vf
gur frpbaq zbagu, gung ur ortna gb ohvyq gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

6:2 Naq gur ubhfr juvpu xvat Fbybzba ohvyg sbe gur YBEQ, gur yratgu
gurerbs jnf guerrfpber phovgf, naq gur oernqgu gurerbs gjragl phovgf,
naq gur urvtug gurerbs guvegl phovgf.

6:3 Naq gur cbepu orsber gur grzcyr bs gur ubhfr, gjragl phovgf jnf
gur yratgu gurerbs, nppbeqvat gb gur oernqgu bs gur ubhfr; naq gra
phovgf jnf gur oernqgu gurerbs orsber gur ubhfr.

6:4 Naq sbe gur ubhfr ur znqr jvaqbjf bs aneebj yvtugf.

6:5 Naq ntnvafg gur jnyy bs gur ubhfr ur ohvyg punzoref ebhaq nobhg,
ntnvafg gur jnyyf bs gur ubhfr ebhaq nobhg, obgu bs gur grzcyr naq bs
gur benpyr: naq ur znqr punzoref ebhaq nobhg: 6:6 Gur argurezbfg
punzore jnf svir phovgf oebnq, naq gur zvqqyr jnf fvk phovgf oebnq,
naq gur guveq jnf frira phovgf oebnq: sbe jvgubhg va gur jnyy bs gur
ubhfr ur znqr aneebjrq erfgf ebhaq nobhg, gung gur ornzf fubhyq abg or
snfgrarq va gur jnyyf bs gur ubhfr.

6:7 Naq gur ubhfr, jura vg jnf va ohvyqvat, jnf ohvyg bs fgbar znqr
ernql orsber vg jnf oebhtug guvgure: fb gung gurer jnf arvgure unzzre
abe nkr abe nal gbby bs veba urneq va gur ubhfr, juvyr vg jnf va
ohvyqvat.

6:8 Gur qbbe sbe gur zvqqyr punzore jnf va gur evtug fvqr bs gur
ubhfr: naq gurl jrag hc jvgu jvaqvat fgnvef vagb gur zvqqyr punzore,
naq bhg bs gur zvqqyr vagb gur guveq.

6:9 Fb ur ohvyg gur ubhfr, naq svavfurq vg; naq pbirerq gur ubhfr jvgu
ornzf naq obneqf bs prqne.

6:10 Naq gura ur ohvyg punzoref ntnvafg nyy gur ubhfr, svir phovgf
uvtu: naq gurl erfgrq ba gur ubhfr jvgu gvzore bs prqne.

6:11 Naq gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ pnzr gb Fbybzba, fnlvat, 6:12 Pbapreavat
guvf ubhfr juvpu gubh neg va ohvyqvat, vs gubh jvyg jnyx va zl
fgnghgrf, naq rkrphgr zl whqtzragf, naq xrrc nyy zl pbzznaqzragf gb
jnyx va gurz; gura jvyy V cresbez zl jbeq jvgu gurr, juvpu V fcnxr
hagb Qnivq gul sngure: 6:13 Naq V jvyy qjryy nzbat gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, naq jvyy abg sbefnxr zl crbcyr Vfenry.

6:14 Fb Fbybzba ohvyg gur ubhfr, naq svavfurq vg.

6:15 Naq ur ohvyg gur jnyyf bs gur ubhfr jvguva jvgu obneqf bs prqne,
obgu gur sybbe bs gur ubhfr, naq gur jnyyf bs gur prvyvat: naq ur
pbirerq gurz ba gur vafvqr jvgu jbbq, naq pbirerq gur sybbe bs gur
ubhfr jvgu cynaxf bs sve.

6:16 Naq ur ohvyg gjragl phovgf ba gur fvqrf bs gur ubhfr, obgu gur
sybbe naq gur jnyyf jvgu obneqf bs prqne: ur rira ohvyg gurz sbe vg
jvguva, rira sbe gur benpyr, rira sbe gur zbfg ubyl cynpr.

6:17 Naq gur ubhfr, gung vf, gur grzcyr orsber vg, jnf sbegl phovgf
ybat.

6:18 Naq gur prqne bs gur ubhfr jvguva jnf pneirq jvgu xabcf naq bcra
sybjref: nyy jnf prqne; gurer jnf ab fgbar frra.

6:19 Naq gur benpyr ur cercnerq va gur ubhfr jvguva, gb frg gurer gur
nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ.

6:20 Naq gur benpyr va gur sbercneg jnf gjragl phovgf va yratgu, naq
gjragl phovgf va oernqgu, naq gjragl phovgf va gur urvtug gurerbs: naq
ur bireynvq vg jvgu cher tbyq; naq fb pbirerq gur nygne juvpu jnf bs
prqne.

6:21 Fb Fbybzba bireynvq gur ubhfr jvguva jvgu cher tbyq: naq ur znqr
n cnegvgvba ol gur punvaf bs tbyq orsber gur benpyr; naq ur bireynvq
vg jvgu tbyq.

6:22 Naq gur jubyr ubhfr ur bireynvq jvgu tbyq, hagvy ur unq svavfurq
nyy gur ubhfr: nyfb gur jubyr nygne gung jnf ol gur benpyr ur bireynvq
jvgu tbyq.

6:23 Naq jvguva gur benpyr ur znqr gjb purehovzf bs byvir gerr, rnpu
gra phovgf uvtu.

6:24 Naq svir phovgf jnf gur bar jvat bs gur pureho, naq svir phovgf
gur bgure jvat bs gur pureho: sebz gur hggrezbfg cneg bs gur bar jvat
hagb gur hggrezbfg cneg bs gur bgure jrer gra phovgf.

6:25 Naq gur bgure pureho jnf gra phovgf: obgu gur purehovzf jrer bs
bar zrnfher naq bar fvmr.

6:26 Gur urvtug bs gur bar pureho jnf gra phovgf, naq fb jnf vg bs gur
bgure pureho.

6:27 Naq ur frg gur purehovzf jvguva gur vaare ubhfr: naq gurl
fgergpurq sbegu gur jvatf bs gur purehovzf, fb gung gur jvat bs gur
bar gbhpurq gur bar jnyy, naq gur jvat bs gur bgure pureho gbhpurq gur
bgure jnyy; naq gurve jvatf gbhpurq bar nabgure va gur zvqfg bs gur
ubhfr.

6:28 Naq ur bireynvq gur purehovzf jvgu tbyq.

6:29 Naq ur pneirq nyy gur jnyyf bs gur ubhfr ebhaq nobhg jvgu pneirq
svtherf bs purehovzf naq cnyz gerrf naq bcra sybjref, jvguva naq
jvgubhg.

6:30 Naq gur sybbef bs gur ubhfr ur bireynvq jvgu tbyq, jvguva naq
jvgubhg.

6:31 Naq sbe gur ragrevat bs gur benpyr ur znqr qbbef bs byvir gerr:
gur yvagry naq fvqr cbfgf jrer n svsgu cneg bs gur jnyy.

6:32 Gur gjb qbbef nyfb jrer bs byvir gerr; naq ur pneirq hcba gurz
pneivatf bs purehovzf naq cnyz gerrf naq bcra sybjref, naq bireynvq
gurz jvgu tbyq, naq fcernq tbyq hcba gur purehovzf, naq hcba gur cnyz
gerrf.

6:33 Fb nyfb znqr ur sbe gur qbbe bs gur grzcyr cbfgf bs byvir gerr, n
sbhegu cneg bs gur jnyy.

6:34 Naq gur gjb qbbef jrer bs sve gerr: gur gjb yrnirf bs gur bar
qbbe jrer sbyqvat, naq gur gjb yrnirf bs gur bgure qbbe jrer sbyqvat.

6:35 Naq ur pneirq gurerba purehovzf naq cnyz gerrf naq bcra sybjref:
naq pbirerq gurz jvgu tbyq svggrq hcba gur pneirq jbex.

6:36 Naq ur ohvyg gur vaare pbheg jvgu guerr ebjf bs urjrq fgbar, naq
n ebj bs prqne ornzf.

6:37 Va gur sbhegu lrne jnf gur sbhaqngvba bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ
ynvq, va gur zbagu Mvs: 6:38 Naq va gur ryriragu lrne, va gur zbagu
Ohy, juvpu vf gur rvtugu zbagu, jnf gur ubhfr svavfurq guebhtubhg nyy
gur cnegf gurerbs, naq nppbeqvat gb nyy gur snfuvba bs vg. Fb jnf ur
frira lrnef va ohvyqvat vg.

7:1 Ohg Fbybzba jnf ohvyqvat uvf bja ubhfr guvegrra lrnef, naq ur
svavfurq nyy uvf ubhfr.

7:2 Ur ohvyg nyfb gur ubhfr bs gur sberfg bs Yronaba; gur yratgu
gurerbs jnf na uhaqerq phovgf, naq gur oernqgu gurerbs svsgl phovgf,
naq gur urvtug gurerbs guvegl phovgf, hcba sbhe ebjf bs prqne cvyynef,
jvgu prqne ornzf hcba gur cvyynef.

7:3 Naq vg jnf pbirerq jvgu prqne nobir hcba gur ornzf, gung ynl ba
sbegl svir cvyynef, svsgrra va n ebj.

7:4 Naq gurer jrer jvaqbjf va guerr ebjf, naq yvtug jnf ntnvafg yvtug
va guerr enaxf.

7:5 Naq nyy gur qbbef naq cbfgf jrer fdhner, jvgu gur jvaqbjf: naq
yvtug jnf ntnvafg yvtug va guerr enaxf.

7:6 Naq ur znqr n cbepu bs cvyynef; gur yratgu gurerbs jnf svsgl
phovgf, naq gur oernqgu gurerbs guvegl phovgf: naq gur cbepu jnf
orsber gurz: naq gur bgure cvyynef naq gur guvpx ornz jrer orsber
gurz.

7:7 Gura ur znqr n cbepu sbe gur guebar jurer ur zvtug whqtr, rira gur
cbepu bs whqtzrag: naq vg jnf pbirerq jvgu prqne sebz bar fvqr bs gur
sybbe gb gur bgure.

7:8 Naq uvf ubhfr jurer ur qjryg unq nabgure pbheg jvguva gur cbepu,
juvpu jnf bs gur yvxr jbex. Fbybzba znqr nyfb na ubhfr sbe Cunenbu'f
qnhtugre, jubz ur unq gnxra gb jvsr, yvxr hagb guvf cbepu.

7:9 Nyy gurfr jrer bs pbfgyl fgbarf, nppbeqvat gb gur zrnfherf bs
urjrq fgbarf, fnjrq jvgu fnjf, jvguva naq jvgubhg, rira sebz gur
sbhaqngvba hagb gur pbcvat, naq fb ba gur bhgfvqr gbjneq gur terng
pbheg.

7:10 Naq gur sbhaqngvba jnf bs pbfgyl fgbarf, rira terng fgbarf,
fgbarf bs gra phovgf, naq fgbarf bs rvtug phovgf.

7:11 Naq nobir jrer pbfgyl fgbarf, nsgre gur zrnfherf bs urjrq fgbarf,
naq prqnef.

7:12 Naq gur terng pbheg ebhaq nobhg jnf jvgu guerr ebjf bs urjrq
fgbarf, naq n ebj bs prqne ornzf, obgu sbe gur vaare pbheg bs gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq sbe gur cbepu bs gur ubhfr.

7:13 Naq xvat Fbybzba frag naq srgpurq Uvenz bhg bs Gler.

7:14 Ur jnf n jvqbj'f fba bs gur gevor bs Ancugnyv, naq uvf sngure jnf
n zna bs Gler, n jbexre va oenff: naq ur jnf svyyrq jvgu jvfqbz, naq
haqrefgnaqvat, naq phaavat gb jbex nyy jbexf va oenff. Naq ur pnzr gb
xvat Fbybzba, naq jebhtug nyy uvf jbex.

7:15 Sbe ur pnfg gjb cvyynef bs oenff, bs rvtugrra phovgf uvtu ncvrpr:
naq n yvar bs gjryir phovgf qvq pbzcnff rvgure bs gurz nobhg.

7:16 Naq ur znqr gjb puncvgref bs zbygra oenff, gb frg hcba gur gbcf
bs gur cvyynef: gur urvtug bs gur bar puncvgre jnf svir phovgf, naq
gur urvtug bs gur bgure puncvgre jnf svir phovgf: 7:17 Naq argf bs
purpxre jbex, naq jernguf bs punva jbex, sbe gur puncvgref juvpu jrer
hcba gur gbc bs gur cvyynef; frira sbe gur bar puncvgre, naq frira sbe
gur bgure puncvgre.

7:18 Naq ur znqr gur cvyynef, naq gjb ebjf ebhaq nobhg hcba gur bar
argjbex, gb pbire gur puncvgref gung jrer hcba gur gbc, jvgu
cbzrtenangrf: naq fb qvq ur sbe gur bgure puncvgre.

7:19 Naq gur puncvgref gung jrer hcba gur gbc bs gur cvyynef jrer bs
yvyl jbex va gur cbepu, sbhe phovgf.

7:20 Naq gur puncvgref hcba gur gjb cvyynef unq cbzrtenangrf nyfb
nobir, bire ntnvafg gur oryyl juvpu jnf ol gur argjbex: naq gur
cbzrtenangrf jrer gjb uhaqerq va ebjf ebhaq nobhg hcba gur bgure
puncvgre.

7:21 Naq ur frg hc gur cvyynef va gur cbepu bs gur grzcyr: naq ur frg
hc gur evtug cvyyne, naq pnyyrq gur anzr gurerbs Wnpuva: naq ur frg hc
gur yrsg cvyyne, naq pnyyrq gur anzr gurerbs Obnm.

7:22 Naq hcba gur gbc bs gur cvyynef jnf yvyl jbex: fb jnf gur jbex bs
gur cvyynef svavfurq.

7:23 Naq ur znqr n zbygra frn, gra phovgf sebz gur bar oevz gb gur
bgure: vg jnf ebhaq nyy nobhg, naq uvf urvtug jnf svir phovgf: naq n
yvar bs guvegl phovgf qvq pbzcnff vg ebhaq nobhg.

7:24 Naq haqre gur oevz bs vg ebhaq nobhg gurer jrer xabcf pbzcnffvat
vg, gra va n phovg, pbzcnffvat gur frn ebhaq nobhg: gur xabcf jrer
pnfg va gjb ebjf, jura vg jnf pnfg.

7:25 Vg fgbbq hcba gjryir bkra, guerr ybbxvat gbjneq gur abegu, naq
guerr ybbxvat gbjneq gur jrfg, naq guerr ybbxvat gbjneq gur fbhgu, naq
guerr ybbxvat gbjneq gur rnfg: naq gur frn jnf frg nobir hcba gurz,
naq nyy gurve uvaqre cnegf jrer vajneq.

7:26 Naq vg jnf na unaq oernqgu guvpx, naq gur oevz gurerbs jnf
jebhtug yvxr gur oevz bs n phc, jvgu sybjref bs yvyvrf: vg pbagnvarq
gjb gubhfnaq onguf.

7:27 Naq ur znqr gra onfrf bs oenff; sbhe phovgf jnf gur yratgu bs bar
onfr, naq sbhe phovgf gur oernqgu gurerbs, naq guerr phovgf gur urvtug
bs vg.

7:28 Naq gur jbex bs gur onfrf jnf ba guvf znaare: gurl unq obeqref,
naq gur obeqref jrer orgjrra gur yrqtrf: 7:29 Naq ba gur obeqref gung
jrer orgjrra gur yrqtrf jrer yvbaf, bkra, naq purehovzf: naq hcba gur
yrqtrf gurer jnf n onfr nobir: naq orarngu gur yvbaf naq bkra jrer
pregnva nqqvgvbaf znqr bs guva jbex.

7:30 Naq rirel onfr unq sbhe oenfra jurryf, naq cyngrf bs oenff: naq
gur sbhe pbearef gurerbs unq haqrefrggref: haqre gur ynire jrer
haqrefrggref zbygra, ng gur fvqr bs rirel nqqvgvba.

7:31 Naq gur zbhgu bs vg jvguva gur puncvgre naq nobir jnf n phovg:
ohg gur zbhgu gurerbs jnf ebhaq nsgre gur jbex bs gur onfr, n phovg
naq na unys: naq nyfb hcba gur zbhgu bs vg jrer tenivatf jvgu gurve
obeqref, sbhefdhner, abg ebhaq.

7:32 Naq haqre gur obeqref jrer sbhe jurryf; naq gur nkyrgerrf bs gur
jurryf jrer wbvarq gb gur onfr: naq gur urvtug bs n jurry jnf n phovg
naq unys n phovg.

7:33 Naq gur jbex bs gur jurryf jnf yvxr gur jbex bs n punevbg jurry:
gurve nkyrgerrf, naq gurve anirf, naq gurve sryybrf, naq gurve fcbxrf,
jrer nyy zbygra.

7:34 Naq gurer jrer sbhe haqrefrggref gb gur sbhe pbearef bs bar onfr:
naq gur haqrefrggref jrer bs gur irel onfr vgfrys.

7:35 Naq va gur gbc bs gur onfr jnf gurer n ebhaq pbzcnff bs unys n
phovg uvtu: naq ba gur gbc bs gur onfr gur yrqtrf gurerbs naq gur
obeqref gurerbs jrer bs gur fnzr.

7:36 Sbe ba gur cyngrf bs gur yrqtrf gurerbs, naq ba gur obeqref
gurerbs, ur tenirq purehovzf, yvbaf, naq cnyz gerrf, nppbeqvat gb gur
cebcbegvba bs rirel bar, naq nqqvgvbaf ebhaq nobhg.

7:37 Nsgre guvf znaare ur znqr gur gra onfrf: nyy bs gurz unq bar
pnfgvat, bar zrnfher, naq bar fvmr.

7:38 Gura znqr ur gra yniref bs oenff: bar ynire pbagnvarq sbegl
onguf: naq rirel ynire jnf sbhe phovgf: naq hcba rirel bar bs gur gra
onfrf bar ynire.

7:39 Naq ur chg svir onfrf ba gur evtug fvqr bs gur ubhfr, naq svir ba
gur yrsg fvqr bs gur ubhfr: naq ur frg gur frn ba gur evtug fvqr bs
gur ubhfr rnfgjneq bire ntnvafg gur fbhgu.

7:40 Naq Uvenz znqr gur yniref, naq gur fubiryf, naq gur onfbaf. Fb
Uvenz znqr na raq bs qbvat nyy gur jbex gung ur znqr xvat Fbybzba sbe
gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ: 7:41 Gur gjb cvyynef, naq gur gjb objyf bs gur
puncvgref gung jrer ba gur gbc bs gur gjb cvyynef; naq gur gjb
argjbexf, gb pbire gur gjb objyf bs gur puncvgref juvpu jrer hcba gur
gbc bs gur cvyynef; 7:42 Naq sbhe uhaqerq cbzrtenangrf sbe gur gjb
argjbexf, rira gjb ebjf bs cbzrtenangrf sbe bar argjbex, gb pbire gur
gjb objyf bs gur puncvgref gung jrer hcba gur cvyynef; 7:43 Naq gur
gra onfrf, naq gra yniref ba gur onfrf; 7:44 Naq bar frn, naq gjryir
bkra haqre gur frn; 7:45 Naq gur cbgf, naq gur fubiryf, naq gur
onfbaf: naq nyy gurfr irffryf, juvpu Uvenz znqr gb xvat Fbybzba sbe
gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, jrer bs oevtug oenff.

7:46 Va gur cynva bs Wbeqna qvq gur xvat pnfg gurz, va gur pynl tebhaq
orgjrra Fhppbgu naq Mneguna.

7:47 Naq Fbybzba yrsg nyy gur irffryf hajrvturq, orpnhfr gurl jrer
rkprrqvat znal: arvgure jnf gur jrvtug bs gur oenff sbhaq bhg.

7:48 Naq Fbybzba znqr nyy gur irffryf gung cregnvarq hagb gur ubhfr bs
gur YBEQ: gur nygne bs tbyq, naq gur gnoyr bs tbyq, jurerhcba gur
furjoernq jnf, 7:49 Naq gur pnaqyrfgvpxf bs cher tbyq, svir ba gur
evtug fvqr, naq svir ba gur yrsg, orsber gur benpyr, jvgu gur sybjref,
naq gur ynzcf, naq gur gbatf bs tbyq, 7:50 Naq gur objyf, naq gur
fahssref, naq gur onfbaf, naq gur fcbbaf, naq gur prafref bs cher
tbyq; naq gur uvatrf bs tbyq, obgu sbe gur qbbef bs gur vaare ubhfr,
gur zbfg ubyl cynpr, naq sbe gur qbbef bs gur ubhfr, gb jvg, bs gur
grzcyr.

7:51 Fb jnf raqrq nyy gur jbex gung xvat Fbybzba znqr sbe gur ubhfr bs
gur YBEQ. Naq Fbybzba oebhtug va gur guvatf juvpu Qnivq uvf sngure unq
qrqvpngrq; rira gur fvyire, naq gur tbyq, naq gur irffryf, qvq ur chg
nzbat gur gernfherf bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

8:1 Gura Fbybzba nffrzoyrq gur ryqref bs Vfenry, naq nyy gur urnqf bs
gur gevorf, gur puvrs bs gur snguref bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, hagb
xvat Fbybzba va Wrehfnyrz, gung gurl zvtug oevat hc gur nex bs gur
pbiranag bs gur YBEQ bhg bs gur pvgl bs Qnivq, juvpu vf Mvba.

8:2 Naq nyy gur zra bs Vfenry nffrzoyrq gurzfryirf hagb xvat Fbybzba
ng gur srnfg va gur zbagu Rgunavz, juvpu vf gur friragu zbagu.

8:3 Naq nyy gur ryqref bs Vfenry pnzr, naq gur cevrfgf gbbx hc gur
nex.

8:4 Naq gurl oebhtug hc gur nex bs gur YBEQ, naq gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba, naq nyy gur ubyl irffryf gung jrer va gur gnoreanpyr,
rira gubfr qvq gur cevrfgf naq gur Yrivgrf oevat hc.

8:5 Naq xvat Fbybzba, naq nyy gur pbatertngvba bs Vfenry, gung jrer
nffrzoyrq hagb uvz, jrer jvgu uvz orsber gur nex, fnpevsvpvat furrc
naq bkra, gung pbhyq abg or gbyq abe ahzorerq sbe zhygvghqr.

8:6 Naq gur cevrfgf oebhtug va gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ
hagb uvf cynpr, vagb gur benpyr bs gur ubhfr, gb gur zbfg ubyl cynpr,
rira haqre gur jvatf bs gur purehovzf.

8:7 Sbe gur purehovzf fcernq sbegu gurve gjb jvatf bire gur cynpr bs
gur nex, naq gur purehovzf pbirerq gur nex naq gur fgnirf gurerbs
nobir.

8:8 Naq gurl qerj bhg gur fgnirf, gung gur raqf bs gur fgnirf jrer
frra bhg va gur ubyl cynpr orsber gur benpyr, naq gurl jrer abg frra
jvgubhg: naq gurer gurl ner hagb guvf qnl.

8:9 Gurer jnf abguvat va gur nex fnir gur gjb gnoyrf bs fgbar, juvpu
Zbfrf chg gurer ng Ubero, jura gur YBEQ znqr n pbiranag jvgu gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry, jura gurl pnzr bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

8:10 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur cevrfgf jrer pbzr bhg bs gur ubyl
cynpr, gung gur pybhq svyyrq gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, 8:11 Fb gung gur
cevrfgf pbhyq abg fgnaq gb zvavfgre orpnhfr bs gur pybhq: sbe gur
tybel bs gur YBEQ unq svyyrq gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

8:12 Gura fcnxr Fbybzba, Gur YBEQ fnvq gung ur jbhyq qjryy va gur
guvpx qnexarff.

8:13 V unir fheryl ohvyg gurr na ubhfr gb qjryy va, n frggyrq cynpr
sbe gurr gb novqr va sbe rire.

8:14 Naq gur xvat ghearq uvf snpr nobhg, naq oyrffrq nyy gur
pbatertngvba bs Vfenry: (naq nyy gur pbatertngvba bs Vfenry fgbbq;)
8:15 Naq ur fnvq, Oyrffrq or gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, juvpu fcnxr jvgu
uvf zbhgu hagb Qnivq zl sngure, naq ungu jvgu uvf unaq shysvyyrq vg,
fnlvat, 8:16 Fvapr gur qnl gung V oebhtug sbegu zl crbcyr Vfenry bhg
bs Rtlcg, V pubfr ab pvgl bhg bs nyy gur gevorf bs Vfenry gb ohvyq na
ubhfr, gung zl anzr zvtug or gurerva; ohg V pubfr Qnivq gb or bire zl
crbcyr Vfenry.

8:17 Naq vg jnf va gur urneg bs Qnivq zl sngure gb ohvyq na ubhfr sbe
gur anzr bs gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry.

8:18 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Qnivq zl sngure, Jurernf vg jnf va guvar
urneg gb ohvyq na ubhfr hagb zl anzr, gubh qvqfg jryy gung vg jnf va
guvar urneg.

8:19 Arireguryrff gubh funyg abg ohvyq gur ubhfr; ohg gul fba gung
funyy pbzr sbegu bhg bs gul ybvaf, ur funyy ohvyq gur ubhfr hagb zl
anzr.

8:20 Naq gur YBEQ ungu cresbezrq uvf jbeq gung ur fcnxr, naq V nz
evfra hc va gur ebbz bs Qnivq zl sngure, naq fvg ba gur guebar bs
Vfenry, nf gur YBEQ cebzvfrq, naq unir ohvyg na ubhfr sbe gur anzr bs
gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry.

8:21 Naq V unir frg gurer n cynpr sbe gur nex, jurerva vf gur pbiranag
bs gur YBEQ, juvpu ur znqr jvgu bhe snguref, jura ur oebhtug gurz bhg
bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg.

8:22 Naq Fbybzba fgbbq orsber gur nygne bs gur YBEQ va gur cerfrapr bs
nyy gur pbatertngvba bs Vfenry, naq fcernq sbegu uvf unaqf gbjneq
urnira: 8:23 Naq ur fnvq, YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, gurer vf ab Tbq yvxr
gurr, va urnira nobir, be ba rnegu orarngu, jub xrrcrfg pbiranag naq
zrepl jvgu gul freinagf gung jnyx orsber gurr jvgu nyy gurve urneg:
8:24 Jub unfg xrcg jvgu gul freinag Qnivq zl sngure gung gubh
cebzvfrqfg uvz: gubh fcnxrfg nyfb jvgu gul zbhgu, naq unfg shysvyyrq
vg jvgu guvar unaq, nf vg vf guvf qnl.

8:25 Gurersber abj, YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, xrrc jvgu gul freinag Qnivq zl
sngure gung gubh cebzvfrqfg uvz, fnlvat, Gurer funyy abg snvy gurr n
zna va zl fvtug gb fvg ba gur guebar bs Vfenry; fb gung gul puvyqera
gnxr urrq gb gurve jnl, gung gurl jnyx orsber zr nf gubh unfg jnyxrq
orsber zr.

8:26 Naq abj, B Tbq bs Vfenry, yrg gul jbeq, V cenl gurr, or irevsvrq,
juvpu gubh fcnxrfg hagb gul freinag Qnivq zl sngure.

8:27 Ohg jvyy Tbq vaqrrq qjryy ba gur rnegu? orubyq, gur urnira naq
urnira bs urniraf pnaabg pbagnva gurr; ubj zhpu yrff guvf ubhfr gung V
unir ohvyqrq?  8:28 Lrg unir gubh erfcrpg hagb gur cenlre bs gul
freinag, naq gb uvf fhccyvpngvba, B YBEQ zl Tbq, gb urnexra hagb gur
pel naq gb gur cenlre, juvpu gul freinag cenlrgu orsber gurr gb qnl:
8:29 Gung guvar rlrf znl or bcra gbjneq guvf ubhfr avtug naq qnl, rira
gbjneq gur cynpr bs juvpu gubh unfg fnvq, Zl anzr funyy or gurer: gung
gubh znlrfg urnexra hagb gur cenlre juvpu gul freinag funyy znxr
gbjneq guvf cynpr.

8:30 Naq urnexra gubh gb gur fhccyvpngvba bs gul freinag, naq bs gul
crbcyr Vfenry, jura gurl funyy cenl gbjneq guvf cynpr: naq urne gubh
va urnira gul qjryyvat cynpr: naq jura gubh urnerfg, sbetvir.

8:31 Vs nal zna gerfcnff ntnvafg uvf arvtuobhe, naq na bngu or ynvq
hcba uvz gb pnhfr uvz gb fjrne, naq gur bngu pbzr orsber guvar nygne
va guvf ubhfr: 8:32 Gura urne gubh va urnira, naq qb, naq whqtr gul
freinagf, pbaqrzavat gur jvpxrq, gb oevat uvf jnl hcba uvf urnq; naq
whfgvslvat gur evtugrbhf, gb tvir uvz nppbeqvat gb uvf evtugrbhfarff.

8:33 Jura gul crbcyr Vfenry or fzvggra qbja orsber gur rarzl, orpnhfr
gurl unir fvaarq ntnvafg gurr, naq funyy ghea ntnva gb gurr, naq
pbasrff gul anzr, naq cenl, naq znxr fhccyvpngvba hagb gurr va guvf
ubhfr: 8:34 Gura urne gubh va urnira, naq sbetvir gur fva bs gul
crbcyr Vfenry, naq oevat gurz ntnva hagb gur ynaq juvpu gubh tnirfg
hagb gurve snguref.

8:35 Jura urnira vf fuhg hc, naq gurer vf ab enva, orpnhfr gurl unir
fvaarq ntnvafg gurr; vs gurl cenl gbjneq guvf cynpr, naq pbasrff gul
anzr, naq ghea sebz gurve fva, jura gubh nssyvpgrfg gurz: 8:36 Gura
urne gubh va urnira, naq sbetvir gur fva bs gul freinagf, naq bs gul
crbcyr Vfenry, gung gubh grnpu gurz gur tbbq jnl jurerva gurl fubhyq
jnyx, naq tvir enva hcba gul ynaq, juvpu gubh unfg tvira gb gul crbcyr
sbe na vaurevgnapr.

8:37 Vs gurer or va gur ynaq snzvar, vs gurer or crfgvyrapr, oynfgvat,
zvyqrj, ybphfg, be vs gurer or pngrecvyyre; vs gurve rarzl orfvrtr
gurz va gur ynaq bs gurve pvgvrf; jungfbrire cynthr, jungfbrire
fvpxarff gurer or; 8:38 Jung cenlre naq fhccyvpngvba fbrire or znqr ol
nal zna, be ol nyy gul crbcyr Vfenry, juvpu funyy xabj rirel zna gur
cynthr bs uvf bja urneg, naq fcernq sbegu uvf unaqf gbjneq guvf ubhfr:
8:39 Gura urne gubh va urnira gul qjryyvat cynpr, naq sbetvir, naq qb,
naq tvir gb rirel zna nppbeqvat gb uvf jnlf, jubfr urneg gubh xabjrfg;
(sbe gubh, rira gubh bayl, xabjrfg gur urnegf bs nyy gur puvyqera bs
zra;) 8:40 Gung gurl znl srne gurr nyy gur qnlf gung gurl yvir va gur
ynaq juvpu gubh tnirfg hagb bhe snguref.

8:41 Zberbire pbapreavat n fgenatre, gung vf abg bs gul crbcyr Vfenry,
ohg pbzrgu bhg bs n sne pbhagel sbe gul anzr'f fnxr; 8:42 (Sbe gurl
funyy urne bs gul terng anzr, naq bs gul fgebat unaq, naq bs gul
fgergpurq bhg nez;) jura ur funyy pbzr naq cenl gbjneq guvf ubhfr;
8:43 Urne gubh va urnira gul qjryyvat cynpr, naq qb nppbeqvat gb nyy
gung gur fgenatre pnyyrgu gb gurr sbe: gung nyy crbcyr bs gur rnegu
znl xabj gul anzr, gb srne gurr, nf qb gul crbcyr Vfenry; naq gung
gurl znl xabj gung guvf ubhfr, juvpu V unir ohvyqrq, vf pnyyrq ol gul
anzr.

8:44 Vs gul crbcyr tb bhg gb onggyr ntnvafg gurve rarzl, juvgurefbrire
gubh funyg fraq gurz, naq funyy cenl hagb gur YBEQ gbjneq gur pvgl
juvpu gubh unfg pubfra, naq gbjneq gur ubhfr gung V unir ohvyg sbe gul
anzr: 8:45 Gura urne gubh va urnira gurve cenlre naq gurve
fhccyvpngvba, naq znvagnva gurve pnhfr.

8:46 Vs gurl fva ntnvafg gurr, (sbe gurer vf ab zna gung fvaargu abg,)
naq gubh or natel jvgu gurz, naq qryvire gurz gb gur rarzl, fb gung
gurl pneel gurz njnl pncgvirf hagb gur ynaq bs gur rarzl, sne be arne;
8:47 Lrg vs gurl funyy orguvax gurzfryirf va gur ynaq juvgure gurl
jrer pneevrq pncgvirf, naq ercrag, naq znxr fhccyvpngvba hagb gurr va
gur ynaq bs gurz gung pneevrq gurz pncgvirf, fnlvat, Jr unir fvaarq,
naq unir qbar creirefryl, jr unir pbzzvggrq jvpxrqarff; 8:48 Naq fb
erghea hagb gurr jvgu nyy gurve urneg, naq jvgu nyy gurve fbhy, va gur
ynaq bs gurve rarzvrf, juvpu yrq gurz njnl pncgvir, naq cenl hagb gurr
gbjneq gurve ynaq, juvpu gubh tnirfg hagb gurve snguref, gur pvgl
juvpu gubh unfg pubfra, naq gur ubhfr juvpu V unir ohvyg sbe gul anzr:
8:49 Gura urne gubh gurve cenlre naq gurve fhccyvpngvba va urnira gul
qjryyvat cynpr, naq znvagnva gurve pnhfr, 8:50 Naq sbetvir gul crbcyr
gung unir fvaarq ntnvafg gurr, naq nyy gurve genafterffvbaf jurerva
gurl unir genafterffrq ntnvafg gurr, naq tvir gurz pbzcnffvba orsber
gurz jub pneevrq gurz pncgvir, gung gurl znl unir pbzcnffvba ba gurz:
8:51 Sbe gurl or gul crbcyr, naq guvar vaurevgnapr, juvpu gubh
oebhtugrfg sbegu bhg bs Rtlcg, sebz gur zvqfg bs gur sheanpr bs veba:
8:52 Gung guvar rlrf znl or bcra hagb gur fhccyvpngvba bs gul freinag,
naq hagb gur fhccyvpngvba bs gul crbcyr Vfenry, gb urnexra hagb gurz
va nyy gung gurl pnyy sbe hagb gurr.

8:53 Sbe gubh qvqfg frcnengr gurz sebz nzbat nyy gur crbcyr bs gur
rnegu, gb or guvar vaurevgnapr, nf gubh fcnxrfg ol gur unaq bs Zbfrf
gul freinag, jura gubh oebhtugrfg bhe snguref bhg bs Rtlcg, B YBEQ
Tbq.

8:54 Naq vg jnf fb, gung jura Fbybzba unq znqr na raq bs cenlvat nyy
guvf cenlre naq fhccyvpngvba hagb gur YBEQ, ur nebfr sebz orsber gur
nygne bs gur YBEQ, sebz xarryvat ba uvf xarrf jvgu uvf unaqf fcernq hc
gb urnira.

8:55 Naq ur fgbbq, naq oyrffrq nyy gur pbatertngvba bs Vfenry jvgu n
ybhq ibvpr, fnlvat, 8:56 Oyrffrq or gur YBEQ, gung ungu tvira erfg
hagb uvf crbcyr Vfenry, nppbeqvat gb nyy gung ur cebzvfrq: gurer ungu
abg snvyrq bar jbeq bs nyy uvf tbbq cebzvfr, juvpu ur cebzvfrq ol gur
unaq bs Zbfrf uvf freinag.

8:57 Gur YBEQ bhe Tbq or jvgu hf, nf ur jnf jvgu bhe snguref: yrg uvz
abg yrnir hf, abe sbefnxr hf: 8:58 Gung ur znl vapyvar bhe urnegf hagb
uvz, gb jnyx va nyy uvf jnlf, naq gb xrrc uvf pbzznaqzragf, naq uvf
fgnghgrf, naq uvf whqtzragf, juvpu ur pbzznaqrq bhe snguref.

8:59 Naq yrg gurfr zl jbeqf, jurerjvgu V unir znqr fhccyvpngvba orsber
gur YBEQ, or avtu hagb gur YBEQ bhe Tbq qnl naq avtug, gung ur
znvagnva gur pnhfr bs uvf freinag, naq gur pnhfr bs uvf crbcyr Vfenry
ng nyy gvzrf, nf gur znggre funyy erdhver: 8:60 Gung nyy gur crbcyr bs
gur rnegu znl xabj gung gur YBEQ vf Tbq, naq gung gurer vf abar ryfr.

8:61 Yrg lbhe urneg gurersber or cresrpg jvgu gur YBEQ bhe Tbq, gb
jnyx va uvf fgnghgrf, naq gb xrrc uvf pbzznaqzragf, nf ng guvf qnl.

8:62 Naq gur xvat, naq nyy Vfenry jvgu uvz, bssrerq fnpevsvpr orsber
gur YBEQ.

8:63 Naq Fbybzba bssrerq n fnpevsvpr bs crnpr bssrevatf, juvpu ur
bssrerq hagb gur YBEQ, gjb naq gjragl gubhfnaq bkra, naq na uhaqerq
naq gjragl gubhfnaq furrc. Fb gur xvat naq nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry
qrqvpngrq gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

8:64 Gur fnzr qnl qvq gur xvat unyybj gur zvqqyr bs gur pbheg gung jnf
orsber gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ: sbe gurer ur bssrerq oheag bssrevatf,
naq zrng bssrevatf, naq gur sng bs gur crnpr bssrevatf: orpnhfr gur
oenfra nygne gung jnf orsber gur YBEQ jnf gbb yvggyr gb erprvir gur
oheag bssrevatf, naq zrng bssrevatf, naq gur sng bs gur crnpr
bssrevatf.

8:65 Naq ng gung gvzr Fbybzba uryq n srnfg, naq nyy Vfenry jvgu uvz, n
terng pbatertngvba, sebz gur ragrevat va bs Unzngu hagb gur evire bs
Rtlcg, orsber gur YBEQ bhe Tbq, frira qnlf naq frira qnlf, rira
sbhegrra qnlf.

8:66 Ba gur rvtugu qnl ur frag gur crbcyr njnl: naq gurl oyrffrq gur
xvat, naq jrag hagb gurve gragf wblshy naq tynq bs urneg sbe nyy gur
tbbqarff gung gur YBEQ unq qbar sbe Qnivq uvf freinag, naq sbe Vfenry
uvf crbcyr.

9:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Fbybzba unq svavfurq gur ohvyqvat bs gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq gur xvat'f ubhfr, naq nyy Fbybzba'f qrfver
juvpu ur jnf cyrnfrq gb qb, 9:2 Gung gur YBEQ nccrnerq gb Fbybzba gur
frpbaq gvzr, nf ur unq nccrnerq hagb uvz ng Tvorba.

9:3 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb uvz, V unir urneq gul cenlre naq gul
fhccyvpngvba, gung gubh unfg znqr orsber zr: V unir unyybjrq guvf
ubhfr, juvpu gubh unfg ohvyg, gb chg zl anzr gurer sbe rire; naq zvar
rlrf naq zvar urneg funyy or gurer crecrghnyyl.

9:4 Naq vs gubh jvyg jnyx orsber zr, nf Qnivq gul sngure jnyxrq, va
vagrtevgl bs urneg, naq va hcevtugarff, gb qb nppbeqvat gb nyy gung V
unir pbzznaqrq gurr, naq jvyg xrrc zl fgnghgrf naq zl whqtzragf: 9:5
Gura V jvyy rfgnoyvfu gur guebar bs gul xvatqbz hcba Vfenry sbe rire,
nf V cebzvfrq gb Qnivq gul sngure, fnlvat, Gurer funyy abg snvy gurr n
zna hcba gur guebar bs Vfenry.

9:6 Ohg vs lr funyy ng nyy ghea sebz sbyybjvat zr, lr be lbhe
puvyqera, naq jvyy abg xrrc zl pbzznaqzragf naq zl fgnghgrf juvpu V
unir frg orsber lbh, ohg tb naq freir bgure tbqf, naq jbefuvc gurz:
9:7 Gura jvyy V phg bss Vfenry bhg bs gur ynaq juvpu V unir tvira
gurz; naq guvf ubhfr, juvpu V unir unyybjrq sbe zl anzr, jvyy V pnfg
bhg bs zl fvtug; naq Vfenry funyy or n cebireo naq n oljbeq nzbat nyy
crbcyr: 9:8 Naq ng guvf ubhfr, juvpu vf uvtu, rirel bar gung cnffrgu
ol vg funyy or nfgbavfurq, naq funyy uvff; naq gurl funyy fnl, Jul
ungu gur YBEQ qbar guhf hagb guvf ynaq, naq gb guvf ubhfr?  9:9 Naq
gurl funyy nafjre, Orpnhfr gurl sbefbbx gur YBEQ gurve Tbq, jub
oebhtug sbegu gurve snguref bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, naq unir gnxra
ubyq hcba bgure tbqf, naq unir jbefuvccrq gurz, naq freirq gurz:
gurersber ungu gur YBEQ oebhtug hcba gurz nyy guvf rivy.

9:10 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng gur raq bs gjragl lrnef, jura Fbybzba unq
ohvyg gur gjb ubhfrf, gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq gur xvat'f ubhfr,
9:11 (Abj Uvenz gur xvat bs Gler unq sheavfurq Fbybzba jvgu prqne
gerrf naq sve gerrf, naq jvgu tbyq, nppbeqvat gb nyy uvf qrfver,) gung
gura xvat Fbybzba tnir Uvenz gjragl pvgvrf va gur ynaq bs Tnyvyrr.

9:12 Naq Uvenz pnzr bhg sebz Gler gb frr gur pvgvrf juvpu Fbybzba unq
tvira uvz; naq gurl cyrnfrq uvz abg.

9:13 Naq ur fnvq, Jung pvgvrf ner gurfr juvpu gubh unfg tvira zr, zl
oebgure? Naq ur pnyyrq gurz gur ynaq bs Pnohy hagb guvf qnl.

9:14 Naq Uvenz frag gb gur xvat fvkfpber gnyragf bs tbyq.

9:15 Naq guvf vf gur ernfba bs gur yril juvpu xvat Fbybzba envfrq; sbe
gb ohvyq gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq uvf bja ubhfr, naq Zvyyb, naq gur
jnyy bs Wrehfnyrz, naq Unmbe, naq Zrtvqqb, naq Trmre.

9:16 Sbe Cunenbu xvat bs Rtlcg unq tbar hc, naq gnxra Trmre, naq oheag
vg jvgu sver, naq fynva gur Pnannavgrf gung qjryg va gur pvgl, naq
tvira vg sbe n cerfrag hagb uvf qnhtugre, Fbybzba'f jvsr.

9:17 Naq Fbybzba ohvyg Trmre, naq Orguubeba gur argure, 9:18 Naq
Onnyngu, naq Gnqzbe va gur jvyqrearff, va gur ynaq, 9:19 Naq nyy gur
pvgvrf bs fgber gung Fbybzba unq, naq pvgvrf sbe uvf punevbgf, naq
pvgvrf sbe uvf ubefrzra, naq gung juvpu Fbybzba qrfverq gb ohvyq va
Wrehfnyrz, naq va Yronaba, naq va nyy gur ynaq bs uvf qbzvavba.

9:20 Naq nyy gur crbcyr gung jrer yrsg bs gur Nzbevgrf, Uvggvgrf,
Crevmmvgrf, Uvivgrf, naq Wrohfvgrf, juvpu jrer abg bs gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, 9:21 Gurve puvyqera gung jrer yrsg nsgre gurz va gur ynaq,
jubz gur puvyqera bs Vfenry nyfb jrer abg noyr hggreyl gb qrfgebl,
hcba gubfr qvq Fbybzba yril n gevohgr bs obaqfreivpr hagb guvf qnl.

9:22 Ohg bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq Fbybzba znxr ab obaqzra: ohg
gurl jrer zra bs jne, naq uvf freinagf, naq uvf cevaprf, naq uvf
pncgnvaf, naq ehyref bs uvf punevbgf, naq uvf ubefrzra.

9:23 Gurfr jrer gur puvrs bs gur bssvpref gung jrer bire Fbybzba'f
jbex, svir uhaqerq naq svsgl, juvpu oner ehyr bire gur crbcyr gung
jebhtug va gur jbex.

9:24 Ohg Cunenbu'f qnhtugre pnzr hc bhg bs gur pvgl bs Qnivq hagb ure
ubhfr juvpu Fbybzba unq ohvyg sbe ure: gura qvq ur ohvyq Zvyyb.

9:25 Naq guerr gvzrf va n lrne qvq Fbybzba bssre oheag bssrevatf naq
crnpr bssrevatf hcba gur nygne juvpu ur ohvyg hagb gur YBEQ, naq ur
oheag vaprafr hcba gur nygne gung jnf orsber gur YBEQ. Fb ur svavfurq
gur ubhfr.

9:26 Naq xvat Fbybzba znqr n anil bs fuvcf va Rmvbatrore, juvpu vf
orfvqr Rybgu, ba gur fuber bs gur Erq frn, va gur ynaq bs Rqbz.

9:27 Naq Uvenz frag va gur anil uvf freinagf, fuvczra gung unq
xabjyrqtr bs gur frn, jvgu gur freinagf bs Fbybzba.

9:28 Naq gurl pnzr gb Bcuve, naq srgpurq sebz gurapr tbyq, sbhe
uhaqerq naq gjragl gnyragf, naq oebhtug vg gb xvat Fbybzba.

10:1 Naq jura gur dhrra bs Furon urneq bs gur snzr bs Fbybzba
pbapreavat gur anzr bs gur YBEQ, fur pnzr gb cebir uvz jvgu uneq
dhrfgvbaf.

10:2 Naq fur pnzr gb Wrehfnyrz jvgu n irel terng genva, jvgu pnzryf
gung oner fcvprf, naq irel zhpu tbyq, naq cerpvbhf fgbarf: naq jura
fur jnf pbzr gb Fbybzba, fur pbzzharq jvgu uvz bs nyy gung jnf va ure
urneg.

10:3 Naq Fbybzba gbyq ure nyy ure dhrfgvbaf: gurer jnf abg nal guvat
uvq sebz gur xvat, juvpu ur gbyq ure abg.

10:4 Naq jura gur dhrra bs Furon unq frra nyy Fbybzba'f jvfqbz, naq
gur ubhfr gung ur unq ohvyg, 10:5 Naq gur zrng bs uvf gnoyr, naq gur
fvggvat bs uvf freinagf, naq gur nggraqnapr bs uvf zvavfgref, naq
gurve nccnery, naq uvf phcorneref, naq uvf nfprag ol juvpu ur jrag hc
hagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ; gurer jnf ab zber fcvevg va ure.

10:6 Naq fur fnvq gb gur xvat, Vg jnf n gehr ercbeg gung V urneq va
zvar bja ynaq bs gul npgf naq bs gul jvfqbz.

10:7 Ubjorvg V oryvrirq abg gur jbeqf, hagvy V pnzr, naq zvar rlrf unq
frra vg: naq, orubyq, gur unys jnf abg gbyq zr: gul jvfqbz naq
cebfcrevgl rkprrqrgu gur snzr juvpu V urneq.

10:8 Unccl ner gul zra, unccl ner gurfr gul freinagf, juvpu fgnaq
pbagvahnyyl orsber gurr, naq gung urne gul jvfqbz.

10:9 Oyrffrq or gur YBEQ gul Tbq, juvpu qryvtugrq va gurr, gb frg gurr
ba gur guebar bs Vfenry: orpnhfr gur YBEQ ybirq Vfenry sbe rire,
gurersber znqr ur gurr xvat, gb qb whqtzrag naq whfgvpr.

10:10 Naq fur tnir gur xvat na uhaqerq naq gjragl gnyragf bs tbyq, naq
bs fcvprf irel terng fgber, naq cerpvbhf fgbarf: gurer pnzr ab zber
fhpu nohaqnapr bs fcvprf nf gurfr juvpu gur dhrra bs Furon tnir gb
xvat Fbybzba.

10:11 Naq gur anil nyfb bs Uvenz, gung oebhtug tbyq sebz Bcuve,
oebhtug va sebz Bcuve terng cyragl bs nyzht gerrf, naq cerpvbhf
fgbarf.

10:12 Naq gur xvat znqr bs gur nyzht gerrf cvyynef sbe gur ubhfr bs
gur YBEQ, naq sbe gur xvat'f ubhfr, unecf nyfb naq cfnygrevrf sbe
fvatref: gurer pnzr ab fhpu nyzht gerrf, abe jrer frra hagb guvf qnl.

10:13 Naq xvat Fbybzba tnir hagb gur dhrra bs Furon nyy ure qrfver,
jungfbrire fur nfxrq, orfvqr gung juvpu Fbybzba tnir ure bs uvf eblny
obhagl.

Fb fur ghearq naq jrag gb ure bja pbhagel, fur naq ure freinagf.

10:14 Abj gur jrvtug bs tbyq gung pnzr gb Fbybzba va bar lrne jnf fvk
uhaqerq guerrfpber naq fvk gnyragf bs tbyq, 10:15 Orfvqr gung ur unq
bs gur zrepunagzra, naq bs gur genssvpx bs gur fcvpr zrepunagf, naq bs
nyy gur xvatf bs Nenovn, naq bs gur tbireabef bs gur pbhagel.

10:16 Naq xvat Fbybzba znqr gjb uhaqerq gnetrgf bs orngra tbyq: fvk
uhaqerq furxryf bs tbyq jrag gb bar gnetrg.

10:17 Naq ur znqr guerr uhaqerq fuvryqf bs orngra tbyq; guerr cbhaq bs
tbyq jrag gb bar fuvryq: naq gur xvat chg gurz va gur ubhfr bs gur
sberfg bs Yronaba.

10:18 Zberbire gur xvat znqr n terng guebar bs vibel, naq bireynvq vg
jvgu gur orfg tbyq.

10:19 Gur guebar unq fvk fgrcf, naq gur gbc bs gur guebar jnf ebhaq
oruvaq: naq gurer jrer fgnlf ba rvgure fvqr ba gur cynpr bs gur frng,
naq gjb yvbaf fgbbq orfvqr gur fgnlf.

10:20 Naq gjryir yvbaf fgbbq gurer ba gur bar fvqr naq ba gur bgure
hcba gur fvk fgrcf: gurer jnf abg gur yvxr znqr va nal xvatqbz.

10:21 Naq nyy xvat Fbybzba'f qevaxvat irffryf jrer bs tbyq, naq nyy
gur irffryf bs gur ubhfr bs gur sberfg bs Yronaba jrer bs cher tbyq;
abar jrer bs fvyire: vg jnf abguvat nppbhagrq bs va gur qnlf bs
Fbybzba.

10:22 Sbe gur xvat unq ng frn n anil bs Gunefuvfu jvgu gur anil bs
Uvenz: bapr va guerr lrnef pnzr gur anil bs Gunefuvfu, oevatvat tbyq,
naq fvyire, vibel, naq ncrf, naq crnpbpxf.

10:23 Fb xvat Fbybzba rkprrqrq nyy gur xvatf bs gur rnegu sbe evpurf
naq sbe jvfqbz.

10:24 Naq nyy gur rnegu fbhtug gb Fbybzba, gb urne uvf jvfqbz, juvpu
Tbq unq chg va uvf urneg.

10:25 Naq gurl oebhtug rirel zna uvf cerfrag, irffryf bs fvyire, naq
irffryf bs tbyq, naq tnezragf, naq nezbhe, naq fcvprf, ubefrf, naq
zhyrf, n engr lrne ol lrne.

10:26 Naq Fbybzba tngurerq gbtrgure punevbgf naq ubefrzra: naq ur unq
n gubhfnaq naq sbhe uhaqerq punevbgf, naq gjryir gubhfnaq ubefrzra,
jubz ur orfgbjrq va gur pvgvrf sbe punevbgf, naq jvgu gur xvat ng
Wrehfnyrz.

10:27 Naq gur xvat znqr fvyire gb or va Wrehfnyrz nf fgbarf, naq
prqnef znqr ur gb or nf gur flpbzber gerrf gung ner va gur inyr, sbe
nohaqnapr.

10:28 Naq Fbybzba unq ubefrf oebhtug bhg bs Rtlcg, naq yvara lnea: gur
xvat'f zrepunagf erprvirq gur yvara lnea ng n cevpr.

10:29 Naq n punevbg pnzr hc naq jrag bhg bs Rtlcg sbe fvk uhaqerq
furxryf bs fvyire, naq na ubefr sbe na uhaqerq naq svsgl: naq fb sbe
nyy gur xvatf bs gur Uvggvgrf, naq sbe gur xvatf bs Flevn, qvq gurl
oevat gurz bhg ol gurve zrnaf.

11:1 Ohg xvat Fbybzba ybirq znal fgenatr jbzra, gbtrgure jvgu gur
qnhtugre bs Cunenbu, jbzra bs gur Zbnovgrf, Nzzbavgrf, Rqbzvgrf,
Mvqbavnaf, naq Uvggvgrf: 11:2 Bs gur angvbaf pbapreavat juvpu gur YBEQ
fnvq hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, Lr funyy abg tb va gb gurz, arvgure
funyy gurl pbzr va hagb lbh: sbe fheryl gurl jvyy ghea njnl lbhe urneg
nsgre gurve tbqf: Fbybzba pynir hagb gurfr va ybir.

11:3 Naq ur unq frira uhaqerq jvirf, cevaprffrf, naq guerr uhaqerq
pbaphovarf: naq uvf jvirf ghearq njnl uvf urneg.

11:4 Sbe vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Fbybzba jnf byq, gung uvf jvirf ghearq
njnl uvf urneg nsgre bgure tbqf: naq uvf urneg jnf abg cresrpg jvgu
gur YBEQ uvf Tbq, nf jnf gur urneg bs Qnivq uvf sngure.

11:5 Sbe Fbybzba jrag nsgre Nfugbergu gur tbqqrff bs gur Mvqbavnaf,
naq nsgre Zvypbz gur nobzvangvba bs gur Nzzbavgrf.

11:6 Naq Fbybzba qvq rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, naq jrag abg shyyl
nsgre gur YBEQ, nf qvq Qnivq uvf sngure.

11:7 Gura qvq Fbybzba ohvyq na uvtu cynpr sbe Purzbfu, gur nobzvangvba
bs Zbno, va gur uvyy gung vf orsber Wrehfnyrz, naq sbe Zbyrpu, gur
nobzvangvba bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba.

11:8 Naq yvxrjvfr qvq ur sbe nyy uvf fgenatr jvirf, juvpu oheag
vaprafr naq fnpevsvprq hagb gurve tbqf.

11:9 Naq gur YBEQ jnf natel jvgu Fbybzba, orpnhfr uvf urneg jnf ghearq
sebz gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, juvpu unq nccrnerq hagb uvz gjvpr, 11:10
Naq unq pbzznaqrq uvz pbapreavat guvf guvat, gung ur fubhyq abg tb
nsgre bgure tbqf: ohg ur xrcg abg gung juvpu gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq.

11:11 Jurersber gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Fbybzba, Sbenfzhpu nf guvf vf qbar
bs gurr, naq gubh unfg abg xrcg zl pbiranag naq zl fgnghgrf, juvpu V
unir pbzznaqrq gurr, V jvyy fheryl eraq gur xvatqbz sebz gurr, naq
jvyy tvir vg gb gul freinag.

11:12 Abgjvgufgnaqvat va gul qnlf V jvyy abg qb vg sbe Qnivq gul
sngure'f fnxr: ohg V jvyy eraq vg bhg bs gur unaq bs gul fba.

11:13 Ubjorvg V jvyy abg eraq njnl nyy gur xvatqbz; ohg jvyy tvir bar
gevor gb gul fba sbe Qnivq zl freinag'f fnxr, naq sbe Wrehfnyrz'f fnxr
juvpu V unir pubfra.

11:14 Naq gur YBEQ fgveerq hc na nqirefnel hagb Fbybzba, Unqnq gur
Rqbzvgr: ur jnf bs gur xvat'f frrq va Rqbz.

11:15 Sbe vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Qnivq jnf va Rqbz, naq Wbno gur
pncgnva bs gur ubfg jnf tbar hc gb ohel gur fynva, nsgre ur unq
fzvggra rirel znyr va Rqbz; 11:16 (Sbe fvk zbaguf qvq Wbno erznva
gurer jvgu nyy Vfenry, hagvy ur unq phg bss rirel znyr va Rqbz:) 11:17
Gung Unqnq syrq, ur naq pregnva Rqbzvgrf bs uvf sngure'f freinagf jvgu
uvz, gb tb vagb Rtlcg; Unqnq orvat lrg n yvggyr puvyq.

11:18 Naq gurl nebfr bhg bs Zvqvna, naq pnzr gb Cnena: naq gurl gbbx
zra jvgu gurz bhg bs Cnena, naq gurl pnzr gb Rtlcg, hagb Cunenbu xvat
bs Rtlcg; juvpu tnir uvz na ubhfr, naq nccbvagrq uvz ivpghnyf, naq
tnir uvz ynaq.

11:19 Naq Unqnq sbhaq terng snibhe va gur fvtug bs Cunenbu, fb gung ur
tnir uvz gb jvsr gur fvfgre bs uvf bja jvsr, gur fvfgre bs Gnucrarf
gur dhrra.

11:20 Naq gur fvfgre bs Gnucrarf oner uvz Trahongu uvf fba, jubz
Gnucrarf jrnarq va Cunenbu'f ubhfr: naq Trahongu jnf va Cunenbu'f
ubhfrubyq nzbat gur fbaf bs Cunenbu.

11:21 Naq jura Unqnq urneq va Rtlcg gung Qnivq fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref,
naq gung Wbno gur pncgnva bs gur ubfg jnf qrnq, Unqnq fnvq gb Cunenbu,
Yrg zr qrcneg, gung V znl tb gb zvar bja pbhagel.

11:22 Gura Cunenbu fnvq hagb uvz, Ohg jung unfg gubh ynpxrq jvgu zr,
gung, orubyq, gubh frrxrfg gb tb gb guvar bja pbhagel? Naq ur
nafjrerq, Abguvat: ubjorvg yrg zr tb va nal jvfr.

11:23 Naq Tbq fgveerq uvz hc nabgure nqirefnel, Ermba gur fba bs
Ryvnqnu, juvpu syrq sebz uvf ybeq Unqnqrmre xvat bs Mbonu: 11:24 Naq
ur tngurerq zra hagb uvz, naq orpnzr pncgnva bire n onaq, jura Qnivq
fyrj gurz bs Mbonu: naq gurl jrag gb Qnznfphf, naq qjryg gurerva, naq
ervtarq va Qnznfphf.

11:25 Naq ur jnf na nqirefnel gb Vfenry nyy gur qnlf bs Fbybzba,
orfvqr gur zvfpuvrs gung Unqnq qvq: naq ur noubeerq Vfenry, naq
ervtarq bire Flevn.

11:26 Naq Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong, na Rcuenguvgr bs Mrerqn,
Fbybzba'f freinag, jubfr zbgure'f anzr jnf Mrehnu, n jvqbj jbzna, rira
ur yvsgrq hc uvf unaq ntnvafg gur xvat.

11:27 Naq guvf jnf gur pnhfr gung ur yvsgrq hc uvf unaq ntnvafg gur
xvat: Fbybzba ohvyg Zvyyb, naq ercnverq gur oernpurf bs gur pvgl bs
Qnivq uvf sngure.

11:28 Naq gur zna Wrebobnz jnf n zvtugl zna bs inybhe: naq Fbybzba
frrvat gur lbhat zna gung ur jnf vaqhfgevbhf, ur znqr uvz ehyre bire
nyy gur punetr bs gur ubhfr bs Wbfrcu.

11:29 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng gung gvzr jura Wrebobnz jrag bhg bs
Wrehfnyrz, gung gur cebcurg Nuvwnu gur Fuvybavgr sbhaq uvz va gur jnl;
naq ur unq pynq uvzfrys jvgu n arj tnezrag; naq gurl gjb jrer nybar va
gur svryq: 11:30 Naq Nuvwnu pnhtug gur arj tnezrag gung jnf ba uvz,
naq erag vg va gjryir cvrprf: 11:31 Naq ur fnvq gb Wrebobnz, Gnxr gurr
gra cvrprf: sbe guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, gur Tbq bs Vfenry, Orubyq, V jvyy
eraq gur xvatqbz bhg bs gur unaq bs Fbybzba, naq jvyy tvir gra gevorf
gb gurr: 11:32 (Ohg ur funyy unir bar gevor sbe zl freinag Qnivq'f
fnxr, naq sbe Wrehfnyrz'f fnxr, gur pvgl juvpu V unir pubfra bhg bs
nyy gur gevorf bs Vfenry:) 11:33 Orpnhfr gung gurl unir sbefnxra zr,
naq unir jbefuvccrq Nfugbergu gur tbqqrff bs gur Mvqbavnaf, Purzbfu
gur tbq bs gur Zbnovgrf, naq Zvypbz gur tbq bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba,
naq unir abg jnyxrq va zl jnlf, gb qb gung juvpu vf evtug va zvar
rlrf, naq gb xrrc zl fgnghgrf naq zl whqtzragf, nf qvq Qnivq uvf
sngure.

11:34 Ubjorvg V jvyy abg gnxr gur jubyr xvatqbz bhg bs uvf unaq: ohg V
jvyy znxr uvz cevapr nyy gur qnlf bs uvf yvsr sbe Qnivq zl freinag'f
fnxr, jubz V pubfr, orpnhfr ur xrcg zl pbzznaqzragf naq zl fgnghgrf:
11:35 Ohg V jvyy gnxr gur xvatqbz bhg bs uvf fba'f unaq, naq jvyy tvir
vg hagb gurr, rira gra gevorf.

11:36 Naq hagb uvf fba jvyy V tvir bar gevor, gung Qnivq zl freinag
znl unir n yvtug nyjnl orsber zr va Wrehfnyrz, gur pvgl juvpu V unir
pubfra zr gb chg zl anzr gurer.

11:37 Naq V jvyy gnxr gurr, naq gubh funyg ervta nppbeqvat gb nyy gung
gul fbhy qrfvergu, naq funyg or xvat bire Vfenry.

11:38 Naq vg funyy or, vs gubh jvyg urnexra hagb nyy gung V pbzznaq
gurr, naq jvyg jnyx va zl jnlf, naq qb gung vf evtug va zl fvtug, gb
xrrc zl fgnghgrf naq zl pbzznaqzragf, nf Qnivq zl freinag qvq; gung V
jvyy or jvgu gurr, naq ohvyq gurr n fher ubhfr, nf V ohvyg sbe Qnivq,
naq jvyy tvir Vfenry hagb gurr.

11:39 Naq V jvyy sbe guvf nssyvpg gur frrq bs Qnivq, ohg abg sbe rire.

11:40 Fbybzba fbhtug gurersber gb xvyy Wrebobnz. Naq Wrebobnz nebfr,
naq syrq vagb Rtlcg, hagb Fuvfunx xvat bs Rtlcg, naq jnf va Rtlcg
hagvy gur qrngu bs Fbybzba.

11:41 Naq gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Fbybzba, naq nyy gung ur qvq, naq
uvf jvfqbz, ner gurl abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur npgf bs Fbybzba?
11:42 Naq gur gvzr gung Fbybzba ervtarq va Wrehfnyrz bire nyy Vfenry
jnf sbegl lrnef.

11:43 Naq Fbybzba fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq jnf ohevrq va gur pvgl
bs Qnivq uvf sngure: naq Erubobnz uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

12:1 Naq Erubobnz jrag gb Furpurz: sbe nyy Vfenry jrer pbzr gb Furpurz
gb znxr uvz xvat.

12:2 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong, jub jnf lrg
va Rtlcg, urneq bs vg, (sbe ur jnf syrq sebz gur cerfrapr bs xvat
Fbybzba, naq Wrebobnz qjryg va Rtlcg;) 12:3 Gung gurl frag naq pnyyrq
uvz. Naq Wrebobnz naq nyy gur pbatertngvba bs Vfenry pnzr, naq fcnxr
hagb Erubobnz, fnlvat, 12:4 Gul sngure znqr bhe lbxr tevribhf: abj
gurersber znxr gubh gur tevribhf freivpr bs gul sngure, naq uvf urnil
lbxr juvpu ur chg hcba hf, yvtugre, naq jr jvyy freir gurr.

12:5 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Qrcneg lrg sbe guerr qnlf, gura pbzr ntnva
gb zr. Naq gur crbcyr qrcnegrq.

12:6 Naq xvat Erubobnz pbafhygrq jvgu gur byq zra, gung fgbbq orsber
Fbybzba uvf sngure juvyr ur lrg yvirq, naq fnvq, Ubj qb lr nqivfr gung
V znl nafjre guvf crbcyr?  12:7 Naq gurl fcnxr hagb uvz, fnlvat, Vs
gubh jvyg or n freinag hagb guvf crbcyr guvf qnl, naq jvyg freir gurz,
naq nafjre gurz, naq fcrnx tbbq jbeqf gb gurz, gura gurl jvyy or gul
freinagf sbe rire.

12:8 Ohg ur sbefbbx gur pbhafry bs gur byq zra, juvpu gurl unq tvira
uvz, naq pbafhygrq jvgu gur lbhat zra gung jrer tebja hc jvgu uvz, naq
juvpu fgbbq orsber uvz: 12:9 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Jung pbhafry tvir
lr gung jr znl nafjre guvf crbcyr, jub unir fcbxra gb zr, fnlvat, Znxr
gur lbxr juvpu gul sngure qvq chg hcba hf yvtugre?  12:10 Naq gur
lbhat zra gung jrer tebja hc jvgu uvz fcnxr hagb uvz, fnlvat, Guhf
funyg gubh fcrnx hagb guvf crbcyr gung fcnxr hagb gurr, fnlvat, Gul
sngure znqr bhe lbxr urnil, ohg znxr gubh vg yvtugre hagb hf; guhf
funyg gubh fnl hagb gurz, Zl yvggyr svatre funyy or guvpxre guna zl
sngure'f ybvaf.

12:11 Naq abj jurernf zl sngure qvq ynqr lbh jvgu n urnil lbxr, V jvyy
nqq gb lbhe lbxr: zl sngure ungu punfgvfrq lbh jvgu juvcf, ohg V jvyy
punfgvfr lbh jvgu fpbecvbaf.

12:12 Fb Wrebobnz naq nyy gur crbcyr pnzr gb Erubobnz gur guveq qnl,
nf gur xvat unq nccbvagrq, fnlvat, Pbzr gb zr ntnva gur guveq qnl.

12:13 Naq gur xvat nafjrerq gur crbcyr ebhtuyl, naq sbefbbx gur byq
zra'f pbhafry gung gurl tnir uvz; 12:14 Naq fcnxr gb gurz nsgre gur
pbhafry bs gur lbhat zra, fnlvat, Zl sngure znqr lbhe lbxr urnil, naq
V jvyy nqq gb lbhe lbxr: zl sngure nyfb punfgvfrq lbh jvgu juvcf, ohg
V jvyy punfgvfr lbh jvgu fpbecvbaf.

12:15 Jurersber gur xvat urnexrarq abg hagb gur crbcyr; sbe gur pnhfr
jnf sebz gur YBEQ, gung ur zvtug cresbez uvf fnlvat, juvpu gur YBEQ
fcnxr ol Nuvwnu gur Fuvybavgr hagb Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong.

12:16 Fb jura nyy Vfenry fnj gung gur xvat urnexrarq abg hagb gurz,
gur crbcyr nafjrerq gur xvat, fnlvat, Jung cbegvba unir jr va Qnivq?
arvgure unir jr vaurevgnapr va gur fba bs Wrffr: gb lbhe gragf, B
Vfenry: abj frr gb guvar bja ubhfr, Qnivq. Fb Vfenry qrcnegrq hagb
gurve gragf.

12:17 Ohg nf sbe gur puvyqera bs Vfenry juvpu qjryg va gur pvgvrf bs
Whqnu, Erubobnz ervtarq bire gurz.

12:18 Gura xvat Erubobnz frag Nqbenz, jub jnf bire gur gevohgr; naq
nyy Vfenry fgbarq uvz jvgu fgbarf, gung ur qvrq. Gurersber xvat
Erubobnz znqr fcrrq gb trg uvz hc gb uvf punevbg, gb syrr gb
Wrehfnyrz.

12:19 Fb Vfenry eroryyrq ntnvafg gur ubhfr bs Qnivq hagb guvf qnl.

12:20 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura nyy Vfenry urneq gung Wrebobnz jnf
pbzr ntnva, gung gurl frag naq pnyyrq uvz hagb gur pbatertngvba, naq
znqr uvz xvat bire nyy Vfenry: gurer jnf abar gung sbyybjrq gur ubhfr
bs Qnivq, ohg gur gevor bs Whqnu bayl.

12:21 Naq jura Erubobnz jnf pbzr gb Wrehfnyrz, ur nffrzoyrq nyy gur
ubhfr bs Whqnu, jvgu gur gevor bs Orawnzva, na uhaqerq naq sbhefpber
gubhfnaq pubfra zra, juvpu jrer jneevbef, gb svtug ntnvafg gur ubhfr
bs Vfenry, gb oevat gur xvatqbz ntnva gb Erubobnz gur fba bs Fbybzba.

12:22 Ohg gur jbeq bs Tbq pnzr hagb Furznvnu gur zna bs Tbq, fnlvat,
12:23 Fcrnx hagb Erubobnz, gur fba bs Fbybzba, xvat bs Whqnu, naq hagb
nyy gur ubhfr bs Whqnu naq Orawnzva, naq gb gur erzanag bs gur crbcyr,
fnlvat, 12:24 Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Lr funyy abg tb hc, abe svtug
ntnvafg lbhe oerguera gur puvyqera bs Vfenry: erghea rirel zna gb uvf
ubhfr; sbe guvf guvat vf sebz zr. Gurl urnexrarq gurersber gb gur jbeq
bs gur YBEQ, naq erghearq gb qrcneg, nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs gur
YBEQ.

12:25 Gura Wrebobnz ohvyg Furpurz va zbhag Rcuenvz, naq qjryg gurerva;
naq jrag bhg sebz gurapr, naq ohvyg Crahry.

12:26 Naq Wrebobnz fnvq va uvf urneg, Abj funyy gur xvatqbz erghea gb
gur ubhfr bs Qnivq: 12:27 Vs guvf crbcyr tb hc gb qb fnpevsvpr va gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ ng Wrehfnyrz, gura funyy gur urneg bs guvf crbcyr
ghea ntnva hagb gurve ybeq, rira hagb Erubobnz xvat bs Whqnu, naq gurl
funyy xvyy zr, naq tb ntnva gb Erubobnz xvat bs Whqnu.

12:28 Jurerhcba gur xvat gbbx pbhafry, naq znqr gjb pnyirf bs tbyq,
naq fnvq hagb gurz, Vg vf gbb zhpu sbe lbh gb tb hc gb Wrehfnyrz:
orubyq gul tbqf, B Vfenry, juvpu oebhtug gurr hc bhg bs gur ynaq bs
Rtlcg.

12:29 Naq ur frg gur bar va Orgury, naq gur bgure chg ur va Qna.

12:30 Naq guvf guvat orpnzr n fva: sbe gur crbcyr jrag gb jbefuvc
orsber gur bar, rira hagb Qna.

12:31 Naq ur znqr na ubhfr bs uvtu cynprf, naq znqr cevrfgf bs gur
ybjrfg bs gur crbcyr, juvpu jrer abg bs gur fbaf bs Yriv.

12:32 Naq Wrebobnz beqnvarq n srnfg va gur rvtugu zbagu, ba gur
svsgrragu qnl bs gur zbagu, yvxr hagb gur srnfg gung vf va Whqnu, naq
ur bssrerq hcba gur nygne. Fb qvq ur va Orgury, fnpevsvpvat hagb gur
pnyirf gung ur unq znqr: naq ur cynprq va Orgury gur cevrfgf bs gur
uvtu cynprf juvpu ur unq znqr.

12:33 Fb ur bssrerq hcba gur nygne juvpu ur unq znqr va Orgury gur
svsgrragu qnl bs gur rvtugu zbagu, rira va gur zbagu juvpu ur unq
qrivfrq bs uvf bja urneg; naq beqnvarq n srnfg hagb gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry: naq ur bssrerq hcba gur nygne, naq oheag vaprafr.

13:1 Naq, orubyq, gurer pnzr n zna bs Tbq bhg bs Whqnu ol gur jbeq bs
gur YBEQ hagb Orgury: naq Wrebobnz fgbbq ol gur nygne gb ohea vaprafr.

13:2 Naq ur pevrq ntnvafg gur nygne va gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ, naq fnvq,
B nygne, nygne, guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ; Orubyq, n puvyq funyy or obea
hagb gur ubhfr bs Qnivq, Wbfvnu ol anzr; naq hcba gurr funyy ur bssre
gur cevrfgf bs gur uvtu cynprf gung ohea vaprafr hcba gurr, naq zra'f
obarf funyy or oheag hcba gurr.

13:3 Naq ur tnir n fvta gur fnzr qnl, fnlvat, Guvf vf gur fvta juvpu
gur YBEQ ungu fcbxra; Orubyq, gur nygne funyy or erag, naq gur nfurf
gung ner hcba vg funyy or cbherq bhg.

13:4 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura xvat Wrebobnz urneq gur fnlvat bs gur
zna bs Tbq, juvpu unq pevrq ntnvafg gur nygne va Orgury, gung ur chg
sbegu uvf unaq sebz gur nygne, fnlvat, Ynl ubyq ba uvz. Naq uvf unaq,
juvpu ur chg sbegu ntnvafg uvz, qevrq hc, fb gung ur pbhyq abg chyy vg
va ntnva gb uvz.

13:5 Gur nygne nyfb jnf erag, naq gur nfurf cbherq bhg sebz gur nygne,
nppbeqvat gb gur fvta juvpu gur zna bs Tbq unq tvira ol gur jbeq bs
gur YBEQ.

13:6 Naq gur xvat nafjrerq naq fnvq hagb gur zna bs Tbq, Vagerng abj
gur snpr bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq, naq cenl sbe zr, gung zl unaq znl or
erfgberq zr ntnva. Naq gur zna bs Tbq orfbhtug gur YBEQ, naq gur
xvat'f unaq jnf erfgberq uvz ntnva, naq orpnzr nf vg jnf orsber.

13:7 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb gur zna bs Tbq, Pbzr ubzr jvgu zr, naq
erserfu gulfrys, naq V jvyy tvir gurr n erjneq.

13:8 Naq gur zna bs Tbq fnvq hagb gur xvat, Vs gubh jvyg tvir zr unys
guvar ubhfr, V jvyy abg tb va jvgu gurr, arvgure jvyy V rng oernq abe
qevax jngre va guvf cynpr: 13:9 Sbe fb jnf vg punetrq zr ol gur jbeq
bs gur YBEQ, fnlvat, Rng ab oernq, abe qevax jngre, abe ghea ntnva ol
gur fnzr jnl gung gubh pnzrfg.

13:10 Fb ur jrag nabgure jnl, naq erghearq abg ol gur jnl gung ur pnzr
gb Orgury.

13:11 Abj gurer qjryg na byq cebcurg va Orgury; naq uvf fbaf pnzr naq
gbyq uvz nyy gur jbexf gung gur zna bs Tbq unq qbar gung qnl va
Orgury: gur jbeqf juvpu ur unq fcbxra hagb gur xvat, gurz gurl gbyq
nyfb gb gurve sngure.

13:12 Naq gurve sngure fnvq hagb gurz, Jung jnl jrag ur? Sbe uvf fbaf
unq frra jung jnl gur zna bs Tbq jrag, juvpu pnzr sebz Whqnu.

13:13 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvf fbaf, Fnqqyr zr gur nff. Fb gurl fnqqyrq
uvz gur nff: naq ur ebqr gurerba, 13:14 Naq jrag nsgre gur zna bs Tbq,
naq sbhaq uvz fvggvat haqre na bnx: naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Neg gubh gur
zna bs Tbq gung pnzrfg sebz Whqnu? Naq ur fnvq, V nz.

13:15 Gura ur fnvq hagb uvz, Pbzr ubzr jvgu zr, naq rng oernq.

13:16 Naq ur fnvq, V znl abg erghea jvgu gurr, abe tb va jvgu gurr:
arvgure jvyy V rng oernq abe qevax jngre jvgu gurr va guvf cynpr:
13:17 Sbe vg jnf fnvq gb zr ol gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ, Gubh funyg rng ab
oernq abe qevax jngre gurer, abe ghea ntnva gb tb ol gur jnl gung gubh
pnzrfg.

13:18 Ur fnvq hagb uvz, V nz n cebcurg nyfb nf gubh neg; naq na natry
fcnxr hagb zr ol gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ, fnlvat, Oevat uvz onpx jvgu
gurr vagb guvar ubhfr, gung ur znl rng oernq naq qevax jngre. Ohg ur
yvrq hagb uvz.

13:19 Fb ur jrag onpx jvgu uvz, naq qvq rng oernq va uvf ubhfr, naq
qenax jngre.

13:20 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf gurl fng ng gur gnoyr, gung gur jbeq bs
gur YBEQ pnzr hagb gur cebcurg gung oebhtug uvz onpx: 13:21 Naq ur
pevrq hagb gur zna bs Tbq gung pnzr sebz Whqnu, fnlvat, Guhf fnvgu gur
YBEQ, Sbenfzhpu nf gubh unfg qvfborlrq gur zbhgu bs gur YBEQ, naq unfg
abg xrcg gur pbzznaqzrag juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq pbzznaqrq gurr, 13:22
Ohg pnzrfg onpx, naq unfg rngra oernq naq qehax jngre va gur cynpr, bs
gur juvpu gur Ybeq qvq fnl gb gurr, Rng ab oernq, naq qevax ab jngre;
gul pnepnfr funyy abg pbzr hagb gur frchypuer bs gul snguref.

13:23 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nsgre ur unq rngra oernq, naq nsgre ur unq
qehax, gung ur fnqqyrq sbe uvz gur nff, gb jvg, sbe gur cebcurg jubz
ur unq oebhtug onpx.

13:24 Naq jura ur jnf tbar, n yvba zrg uvz ol gur jnl, naq fyrj uvz:
naq uvf pnepnfr jnf pnfg va gur jnl, naq gur nff fgbbq ol vg, gur yvba
nyfb fgbbq ol gur pnepnfr.

13:25 Naq, orubyq, zra cnffrq ol, naq fnj gur pnepnfr pnfg va gur jnl,
naq gur yvba fgnaqvat ol gur pnepnfr: naq gurl pnzr naq gbyq vg va gur
pvgl jurer gur byq cebcurg qjryg.

13:26 Naq jura gur cebcurg gung oebhtug uvz onpx sebz gur jnl urneq
gurerbs, ur fnvq, Vg vf gur zna bs Tbq, jub jnf qvfborqvrag hagb gur
jbeq bs gur YBEQ: gurersber gur YBEQ ungu qryvirerq uvz hagb gur yvba,
juvpu ungu gbea uvz, naq fynva uvz, nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ,
juvpu ur fcnxr hagb uvz.

13:27 Naq ur fcnxr gb uvf fbaf, fnlvat, Fnqqyr zr gur nff. Naq gurl
fnqqyrq uvz.

13:28 Naq ur jrag naq sbhaq uvf pnepnfr pnfg va gur jnl, naq gur nff
naq gur yvba fgnaqvat ol gur pnepnfr: gur yvba unq abg rngra gur
pnepnfr, abe gbea gur nff.

13:29 Naq gur cebcurg gbbx hc gur pnepnfr bs gur zna bs Tbq, naq ynvq
vg hcba gur nff, naq oebhtug vg onpx: naq gur byq cebcurg pnzr gb gur
pvgl, gb zbhea naq gb ohel uvz.

13:30 Naq ur ynvq uvf pnepnfr va uvf bja tenir; naq gurl zbhearq bire
uvz, fnlvat, Nynf, zl oebgure!  13:31 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nsgre ur
unq ohevrq uvz, gung ur fcnxr gb uvf fbaf, fnlvat, Jura V nz qrnq,
gura ohel zr va gur frchypuer jurerva gur zna bs Tbq vf ohevrq; ynl zl
obarf orfvqr uvf obarf: 13:32 Sbe gur fnlvat juvpu ur pevrq ol gur
jbeq bs gur YBEQ ntnvafg gur nygne va Orgury, naq ntnvafg nyy gur
ubhfrf bs gur uvtu cynprf juvpu ner va gur pvgvrf bs Fnznevn, funyy
fheryl pbzr gb cnff.

13:33 Nsgre guvf guvat Wrebobnz erghearq abg sebz uvf rivy jnl, ohg
znqr ntnva bs gur ybjrfg bs gur crbcyr cevrfgf bs gur uvtu cynprf:
jubfbrire jbhyq, ur pbafrpengrq uvz, naq ur orpnzr bar bs gur cevrfgf
bs gur uvtu cynprf.

13:34 Naq guvf guvat orpnzr fva hagb gur ubhfr bs Wrebobnz, rira gb
phg vg bss, naq gb qrfgebl vg sebz bss gur snpr bs gur rnegu.

14:1 Ng gung gvzr Novwnu gur fba bs Wrebobnz sryy fvpx.

14:2 Naq Wrebobnz fnvq gb uvf jvsr, Nevfr, V cenl gurr, naq qvfthvfr
gulfrys, gung gubh or abg xabja gb or gur jvsr bs Wrebobnz; naq trg
gurr gb Fuvybu: orubyq, gurer vf Nuvwnu gur cebcurg, juvpu gbyq zr
gung V fubhyq or xvat bire guvf crbcyr.

14:3 Naq gnxr jvgu gurr gra ybnirf, naq penpxaryf, naq n pehfr bs
ubarl, naq tb gb uvz: ur funyy gryy gurr jung funyy orpbzr bs gur
puvyq.

14:4 Naq Wrebobnz'f jvsr qvq fb, naq nebfr, naq jrag gb Fuvybu, naq
pnzr gb gur ubhfr bs Nuvwnu. Ohg Nuvwnu pbhyq abg frr; sbe uvf rlrf
jrer frg ol ernfba bs uvf ntr.

14:5 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Nuvwnu, Orubyq, gur jvsr bs Wrebobnz
pbzrgu gb nfx n guvat bs gurr sbe ure fba; sbe ur vf fvpx: guhf naq
guhf funyg gubh fnl hagb ure: sbe vg funyy or, jura fur pbzrgu va,
gung fur funyy srvta urefrys gb or nabgure jbzna.

14:6 Naq vg jnf fb, jura Nuvwnu urneq gur fbhaq bs ure srrg, nf fur
pnzr va ng gur qbbe, gung ur fnvq, Pbzr va, gubh jvsr bs Wrebobnz; jul
srvtarfg gubh gulfrys gb or nabgure? sbe V nz frag gb gurr jvgu urnil
gvqvatf.

14:7 Tb, gryy Wrebobnz, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, Sbenfzhpu
nf V rknygrq gurr sebz nzbat gur crbcyr, naq znqr gurr cevapr bire zl
crbcyr Vfenry, 14:8 Naq erag gur xvatqbz njnl sebz gur ubhfr bs Qnivq,
naq tnir vg gurr: naq lrg gubh unfg abg orra nf zl freinag Qnivq, jub
xrcg zl pbzznaqzragf, naq jub sbyybjrq zr jvgu nyy uvf urneg, gb qb
gung bayl juvpu jnf evtug va zvar rlrf; 14:9 Ohg unfg qbar rivy nobir
nyy gung jrer orsber gurr: sbe gubh unfg tbar naq znqr gurr bgure
tbqf, naq zbygra vzntrf, gb cebibxr zr gb natre, naq unfg pnfg zr
oruvaq gul onpx: 14:10 Gurersber, orubyq, V jvyy oevat rivy hcba gur
ubhfr bs Wrebobnz, naq jvyy phg bss sebz Wrebobnz uvz gung cvffrgu
ntnvafg gur jnyy, naq uvz gung vf fuhg hc naq yrsg va Vfenry, naq jvyy
gnxr njnl gur erzanag bs gur ubhfr bs Wrebobnz, nf n zna gnxrgu njnl
qhat, gvyy vg or nyy tbar.

14:11 Uvz gung qvrgu bs Wrebobnz va gur pvgl funyy gur qbtf rng; naq
uvz gung qvrgu va gur svryq funyy gur sbjyf bs gur nve rng: sbe gur
YBEQ ungu fcbxra vg.

14:12 Nevfr gubh gurersber, trg gurr gb guvar bja ubhfr: naq jura gul
srrg ragre vagb gur pvgl, gur puvyq funyy qvr.

14:13 Naq nyy Vfenry funyy zbhea sbe uvz, naq ohel uvz: sbe ur bayl bs
Wrebobnz funyy pbzr gb gur tenir, orpnhfr va uvz gurer vf sbhaq fbzr
tbbq guvat gbjneq gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry va gur ubhfr bs Wrebobnz.

14:14 Zberbire gur YBEQ funyy envfr uvz hc n xvat bire Vfenry, jub
funyy phg bss gur ubhfr bs Wrebobnz gung qnl: ohg jung? rira abj.

14:15 Sbe gur YBEQ funyy fzvgr Vfenry, nf n errq vf funxra va gur
jngre, naq ur funyy ebbg hc Vfenry bhg bs guvf tbbq ynaq, juvpu ur
tnir gb gurve snguref, naq funyy fpnggre gurz orlbaq gur evire,
orpnhfr gurl unir znqr gurve tebirf, cebibxvat gur YBEQ gb natre.

14:16 Naq ur funyy tvir Vfenry hc orpnhfr bs gur fvaf bs Wrebobnz, jub
qvq fva, naq jub znqr Vfenry gb fva.

14:17 Naq Wrebobnz'f jvsr nebfr, naq qrcnegrq, naq pnzr gb Gvemnu: naq
jura fur pnzr gb gur guerfubyq bs gur qbbe, gur puvyq qvrq; 14:18 Naq
gurl ohevrq uvz; naq nyy Vfenry zbhearq sbe uvz, nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq
bs gur YBEQ, juvpu ur fcnxr ol gur unaq bs uvf freinag Nuvwnu gur
cebcurg.

14:19 Naq gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Wrebobnz, ubj ur jneerq, naq ubj ur
ervtarq, orubyq, gurl ner jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur
xvatf bs Vfenry.

14:20 Naq gur qnlf juvpu Wrebobnz ervtarq jrer gjb naq gjragl lrnef:
naq ur fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq Anqno uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

14:21 Naq Erubobnz gur fba bs Fbybzba ervtarq va Whqnu. Erubobnz jnf
sbegl naq bar lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq ur ervtarq
friragrra lrnef va Wrehfnyrz, gur pvgl juvpu gur YBEQ qvq pubbfr bhg
bs nyy gur gevorf bs Vfenry, gb chg uvf anzr gurer. Naq uvf zbgure'f
anzr jnf Annznu na Nzzbavgrff.

14:22 Naq Whqnu qvq rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, naq gurl cebibxrq
uvz gb wrnybhfl jvgu gurve fvaf juvpu gurl unq pbzzvggrq, nobir nyy
gung gurve snguref unq qbar.

14:23 Sbe gurl nyfb ohvyg gurz uvtu cynprf, naq vzntrf, naq tebirf, ba
rirel uvtu uvyy, naq haqre rirel terra gerr.

14:24 Naq gurer jrer nyfb fbqbzvgrf va gur ynaq: naq gurl qvq
nppbeqvat gb nyy gur nobzvangvbaf bs gur angvbaf juvpu gur YBEQ pnfg
bhg orsber gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

14:25 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gur svsgu lrne bs xvat Erubobnz, gung
Fuvfunx xvat bs Rtlcg pnzr hc ntnvafg Wrehfnyrz: 14:26 Naq ur gbbx
njnl gur gernfherf bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq gur gernfherf bs gur
xvat'f ubhfr; ur rira gbbx njnl nyy: naq ur gbbx njnl nyy gur fuvryqf
bs tbyq juvpu Fbybzba unq znqr.

14:27 Naq xvat Erubobnz znqr va gurve fgrnq oenfra fuvryqf, naq
pbzzvggrq gurz hagb gur unaqf bs gur puvrs bs gur thneq, juvpu xrcg
gur qbbe bs gur xvat'f ubhfr.

14:28 Naq vg jnf fb, jura gur xvat jrag vagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ,
gung gur thneq oner gurz, naq oebhtug gurz onpx vagb gur thneq
punzore.

14:29 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Erubobnz, naq nyy gung ur qvq, ner
gurl abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Whqnu?
14:30 Naq gurer jnf jne orgjrra Erubobnz naq Wrebobnz nyy gurve qnlf.

14:31 Naq Erubobnz fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq jnf ohevrq jvgu uvf
snguref va gur pvgl bs Qnivq. Naq uvf zbgure'f anzr jnf Annznu na
Nzzbavgrff. Naq Novwnz uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

15:1 Abj va gur rvtugrragu lrne bs xvat Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong
ervtarq Novwnz bire Whqnu.

15:2 Guerr lrnef ervtarq ur va Wrehfnyrz. naq uvf zbgure'f anzr jnf
Znnpunu, gur qnhtugre bs Novfunybz.

15:3 Naq ur jnyxrq va nyy gur fvaf bs uvf sngure, juvpu ur unq qbar
orsber uvz: naq uvf urneg jnf abg cresrpg jvgu gur YBEQ uvf Tbq, nf
gur urneg bs Qnivq uvf sngure.

15:4 Arireguryrff sbe Qnivq'f fnxr qvq gur YBEQ uvf Tbq tvir uvz n
ynzc va Wrehfnyrz, gb frg hc uvf fba nsgre uvz, naq gb rfgnoyvfu
Wrehfnyrz: 15:5 Orpnhfr Qnivq qvq gung juvpu jnf evtug va gur rlrf bs
gur YBEQ, naq ghearq abg nfvqr sebz nal guvat gung ur pbzznaqrq uvz
nyy gur qnlf bs uvf yvsr, fnir bayl va gur znggre bs Hevnu gur
Uvggvgr.

15:6 Naq gurer jnf jne orgjrra Erubobnz naq Wrebobnz nyy gur qnlf bs
uvf yvsr.

15:7 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Novwnz, naq nyy gung ur qvq, ner gurl
abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Whqnu? Naq
gurer jnf jne orgjrra Novwnz naq Wrebobnz.

15:8 Naq Novwnz fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref; naq gurl ohevrq uvz va gur
pvgl bs Qnivq: naq Nfn uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

15:9 Naq va gur gjragvrgu lrne bs Wrebobnz xvat bs Vfenry ervtarq Nfn
bire Whqnu.

15:10 Naq sbegl naq bar lrnef ervtarq ur va Wrehfnyrz. Naq uvf
zbgure'f anzr jnf Znnpunu, gur qnhtugre bs Novfunybz.

15:11 Naq Nfn qvq gung juvpu jnf evtug va gur rlrf bs gur YBEQ, nf qvq
Qnivq uvf sngure.

15:12 Naq ur gbbx njnl gur fbqbzvgrf bhg bs gur ynaq, naq erzbirq nyy
gur vqbyf gung uvf snguref unq znqr.

15:13 Naq nyfb Znnpunu uvf zbgure, rira ure ur erzbirq sebz orvat
dhrra, orpnhfr fur unq znqr na vqby va n tebir; naq Nfn qrfgeblrq ure
vqby, naq oheag vg ol gur oebbx Xvqeba.

15:14 Ohg gur uvtu cynprf jrer abg erzbirq: arireguryrff Nfn'f urneg
jnf cresrpg jvgu gur YBEQ nyy uvf qnlf.

15:15 Naq ur oebhtug va gur guvatf juvpu uvf sngure unq qrqvpngrq, naq
gur guvatf juvpu uvzfrys unq qrqvpngrq, vagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ,
fvyire, naq tbyq, naq irffryf.

15:16 Naq gurer jnf jne orgjrra Nfn naq Onnfun xvat bs Vfenry nyy
gurve qnlf.

15:17 Naq Onnfun xvat bs Vfenry jrag hc ntnvafg Whqnu, naq ohvyg
Enznu, gung ur zvtug abg fhssre nal gb tb bhg be pbzr va gb Nfn xvat
bs Whqnu.

15:18 Gura Nfn gbbx nyy gur fvyire naq gur tbyq gung jrer yrsg va gur
gernfherf bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq gur gernfherf bs gur xvat'f
ubhfr, naq qryvirerq gurz vagb gur unaq bs uvf freinagf: naq xvat Nfn
frag gurz gb Oraunqnq, gur fba bs Gnoevzba, gur fba bs Urmvba, xvat bs
Flevn, gung qjryg ng Qnznfphf, fnlvat, 15:19 Gurer vf n yrnthr orgjrra
zr naq gurr, naq orgjrra zl sngure naq gul sngure: orubyq, V unir frag
hagb gurr n cerfrag bs fvyire naq tbyq; pbzr naq oernx gul yrnthr jvgu
Onnfun xvat bs Vfenry, gung ur znl qrcneg sebz zr.

15:20 Fb Oraunqnq urnexrarq hagb xvat Nfn, naq frag gur pncgnvaf bs
gur ubfgf juvpu ur unq ntnvafg gur pvgvrf bs Vfenry, naq fzbgr Vwba,
naq Qna, naq Noryorguznnpunu, naq nyy Pvaarebgu, jvgu nyy gur ynaq bs
Ancugnyv.

15:21 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Onnfun urneq gurerbs, gung ur yrsg bss
ohvyqvat bs Enznu, naq qjryg va Gvemnu.

15:22 Gura xvat Nfn znqr n cebpynzngvba guebhtubhg nyy Whqnu; abar jnf
rkrzcgrq: naq gurl gbbx njnl gur fgbarf bs Enznu, naq gur gvzore
gurerbs, jurerjvgu Onnfun unq ohvyqrq; naq xvat Nfn ohvyg jvgu gurz
Tron bs Orawnzva, naq Zvmcnu.

15:23 Gur erfg bs nyy gur npgf bs Nfn, naq nyy uvf zvtug, naq nyy gung
ur qvq, naq gur pvgvrf juvpu ur ohvyg, ner gurl abg jevggra va gur
obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Whqnu? Arireguryrff va gur gvzr
bs uvf byq ntr ur jnf qvfrnfrq va uvf srrg.

15:24 Naq Nfn fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq jnf ohevrq jvgu uvf snguref
va gur pvgl bs Qnivq uvf sngure: naq Wrubfuncung uvf fba ervtarq va
uvf fgrnq.

15:25 Naq Anqno gur fba bs Wrebobnz ortna gb ervta bire Vfenry va gur
frpbaq lrne bs Nfn xvat bs Whqnu, naq ervtarq bire Vfenry gjb lrnef.

15:26 Naq ur qvq rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, naq jnyxrq va gur jnl
bs uvf sngure, naq va uvf fva jurerjvgu ur znqr Vfenry gb fva.

15:27 Naq Onnfun gur fba bs Nuvwnu, bs gur ubhfr bs Vffnpune,
pbafcverq ntnvafg uvz; naq Onnfun fzbgr uvz ng Tvoorguba, juvpu
orybatrq gb gur Cuvyvfgvarf; sbe Anqno naq nyy Vfenry ynvq fvrtr gb
Tvoorguba.

15:28 Rira va gur guveq lrne bs Nfn xvat bs Whqnu qvq Onnfun fynl uvz,
naq ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

15:29 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura ur ervtarq, gung ur fzbgr nyy gur
ubhfr bs Wrebobnz; ur yrsg abg gb Wrebobnz nal gung oerngurq, hagvy ur
unq qrfgeblrq uvz, nppbeqvat hagb gur fnlvat bs gur YBEQ, juvpu ur
fcnxr ol uvf freinag Nuvwnu gur Fuvybavgr: 15:30 Orpnhfr bs gur fvaf
bs Wrebobnz juvpu ur fvaarq, naq juvpu ur znqr Vfenry fva, ol uvf
cebibpngvba jurerjvgu ur cebibxrq gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry gb natre.

15:31 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Anqno, naq nyy gung ur qvq, ner gurl
abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Vfenry?
15:32 Naq gurer jnf jne orgjrra Nfn naq Onnfun xvat bs Vfenry nyy
gurve qnlf.

15:33 Va gur guveq lrne bs Nfn xvat bs Whqnu ortna Onnfun gur fba bs
Nuvwnu gb ervta bire nyy Vfenry va Gvemnu, gjragl naq sbhe lrnef.

15:34 Naq ur qvq rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, naq jnyxrq va gur jnl
bs Wrebobnz, naq va uvf fva jurerjvgu ur znqr Vfenry gb fva.

16:1 Gura gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ pnzr gb Wruh gur fba bs Unanav ntnvafg
Onnfun, fnlvat, 16:2 Sbenfzhpu nf V rknygrq gurr bhg bs gur qhfg, naq
znqr gurr cevapr bire zl crbcyr Vfenry; naq gubh unfg jnyxrq va gur
jnl bs Wrebobnz, naq unfg znqr zl crbcyr Vfenry gb fva, gb cebibxr zr
gb natre jvgu gurve fvaf; 16:3 Orubyq, V jvyy gnxr njnl gur cbfgrevgl
bs Onnfun, naq gur cbfgrevgl bs uvf ubhfr; naq jvyy znxr gul ubhfr
yvxr gur ubhfr bs Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong.

16:4 Uvz gung qvrgu bs Onnfun va gur pvgl funyy gur qbtf rng; naq uvz
gung qvrgu bs uvf va gur svryqf funyy gur sbjyf bs gur nve rng.

16:5 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Onnfun, naq jung ur qvq, naq uvf
zvtug, ner gurl abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf
bs Vfenry?  16:6 Fb Onnfun fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq jnf ohevrq va
Gvemnu: naq Rynu uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

16:7 Naq nyfb ol gur unaq bs gur cebcurg Wruh gur fba bs Unanav pnzr
gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ ntnvafg Onnfun, naq ntnvafg uvf ubhfr, rira sbe
nyy gur rivy gung ur qvq va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, va cebibxvat uvz gb
natre jvgu gur jbex bs uvf unaqf, va orvat yvxr gur ubhfr bs Wrebobnz;
naq orpnhfr ur xvyyrq uvz.

16:8 Va gur gjragl naq fvkgu lrne bs Nfn xvat bs Whqnu ortna Rynu gur
fba bs Onnfun gb ervta bire Vfenry va Gvemnu, gjb lrnef.

16:9 Naq uvf freinag Mvzev, pncgnva bs unys uvf punevbgf, pbafcverq
ntnvafg uvz, nf ur jnf va Gvemnu, qevaxvat uvzfrys qehax va gur ubhfr
bs Nemn fgrjneq bs uvf ubhfr va Gvemnu.

16:10 Naq Mvzev jrag va naq fzbgr uvz, naq xvyyrq uvz, va gur gjragl
naq friragu lrne bs Nfn xvat bs Whqnu, naq ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

16:11 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura ur ortna gb ervta, nf fbba nf ur fng
ba uvf guebar, gung ur fyrj nyy gur ubhfr bs Onnfun: ur yrsg uvz abg
bar gung cvffrgu ntnvafg n jnyy, arvgure bs uvf xvafsbyxf, abe bs uvf
sevraqf.

16:12 Guhf qvq Mvzev qrfgebl nyy gur ubhfr bs Onnfun, nppbeqvat gb gur
jbeq bs gur YBEQ, juvpu ur fcnxr ntnvafg Onnfun ol Wruh gur cebcurg.

16:13 Sbe nyy gur fvaf bs Onnfun, naq gur fvaf bs Rynu uvf fba, ol
juvpu gurl fvaarq, naq ol juvpu gurl znqr Vfenry gb fva, va cebibxvat
gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry gb natre jvgu gurve inavgvrf.

16:14 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Rynu, naq nyy gung ur qvq, ner gurl
abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Vfenry?
16:15 Va gur gjragl naq friragu lrne bs Nfn xvat bs Whqnu qvq Mvzev
ervta frira qnlf va Gvemnu. Naq gur crbcyr jrer rapnzcrq ntnvafg
Tvoorguba, juvpu orybatrq gb gur Cuvyvfgvarf.

16:16 Naq gur crbcyr gung jrer rapnzcrq urneq fnl, Mvzev ungu
pbafcverq, naq ungu nyfb fynva gur xvat: jurersber nyy Vfenry znqr
Bzev, gur pncgnva bs gur ubfg, xvat bire Vfenry gung qnl va gur pnzc.

16:17 Naq Bzev jrag hc sebz Tvoorguba, naq nyy Vfenry jvgu uvz, naq
gurl orfvrtrq Gvemnu.

16:18 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Mvzev fnj gung gur pvgl jnf gnxra,
gung ur jrag vagb gur cnynpr bs gur xvat'f ubhfr, naq oheag gur xvat'f
ubhfr bire uvz jvgu sver, naq qvrq.

16:19 Sbe uvf fvaf juvpu ur fvaarq va qbvat rivy va gur fvtug bs gur
YBEQ, va jnyxvat va gur jnl bs Wrebobnz, naq va uvf fva juvpu ur qvq,
gb znxr Vfenry gb fva.

16:20 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Mvzev, naq uvf gernfba gung ur
jebhtug, ner gurl abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur
xvatf bs Vfenry?  16:21 Gura jrer gur crbcyr bs Vfenry qvivqrq vagb
gjb cnegf: unys bs gur crbcyr sbyybjrq Gvoav gur fba bs Tvangu, gb
znxr uvz xvat; naq unys sbyybjrq Bzev.

16:22 Ohg gur crbcyr gung sbyybjrq Bzev cerinvyrq ntnvafg gur crbcyr
gung sbyybjrq Gvoav gur fba bs Tvangu: fb Gvoav qvrq, naq Bzev
ervtarq.

16:23 Va gur guvegl naq svefg lrne bs Nfn xvat bs Whqnu ortna Bzev gb
ervta bire Vfenry, gjryir lrnef: fvk lrnef ervtarq ur va Gvemnu.

16:24 Naq ur obhtug gur uvyy Fnznevn bs Furzre sbe gjb gnyragf bs
fvyire, naq ohvyg ba gur uvyy, naq pnyyrq gur anzr bs gur pvgl juvpu
ur ohvyg, nsgre gur anzr bs Furzre, bjare bs gur uvyy, Fnznevn.

16:25 Ohg Bzev jebhtug rivy va gur rlrf bs gur YBEQ, naq qvq jbefr
guna nyy gung jrer orsber uvz.

16:26 Sbe ur jnyxrq va nyy gur jnl bs Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong, naq
va uvf fva jurerjvgu ur znqr Vfenry gb fva, gb cebibxr gur YBEQ Tbq bs
Vfenry gb natre jvgu gurve inavgvrf.

16:27 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Bzev juvpu ur qvq, naq uvf zvtug
gung ur furjrq, ner gurl abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs
gur xvatf bs Vfenry?  16:28 Fb Bzev fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq jnf
ohevrq va Fnznevn: naq Nuno uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

16:29 Naq va gur guvegl naq rvtugu lrne bs Nfn xvat bs Whqnu ortna
Nuno gur fba bs Bzev gb ervta bire Vfenry: naq Nuno gur fba bs Bzev
ervtarq bire Vfenry va Fnznevn gjragl naq gjb lrnef.

16:30 Naq Nuno gur fba bs Bzev qvq rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ nobir
nyy gung jrer orsber uvz.

16:31 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf vs vg unq orra n yvtug guvat sbe uvz gb
jnyx va gur fvaf bs Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong, gung ur gbbx gb jvsr
Wrmrory gur qnhtugre bs Rguonny xvat bs gur Mvqbavnaf, naq jrag naq
freirq Onny, naq jbefuvccrq uvz.

16:32 Naq ur ernerq hc na nygne sbe Onny va gur ubhfr bs Onny, juvpu
ur unq ohvyg va Fnznevn.

16:33 Naq Nuno znqr n tebir; naq Nuno qvq zber gb cebibxr gur YBEQ Tbq
bs Vfenry gb natre guna nyy gur xvatf bs Vfenry gung jrer orsber uvz.

16:34 Va uvf qnlf qvq Uvry gur Orguryvgr ohvyq Wrevpub: ur ynvq gur
sbhaqngvba gurerbs va Novenz uvf svefgobea, naq frg hc gur tngrf
gurerbs va uvf lbhatrfg fba Frtho, nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ,
juvpu ur fcnxr ol Wbfuhn gur fba bs Aha.

17:1 Naq Ryvwnu gur Gvfuovgr, jub jnf bs gur vaunovgnagf bs Tvyrnq,
fnvq hagb Nuno, Nf gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry yvirgu, orsber jubz V fgnaq,
gurer funyy abg or qrj abe enva gurfr lrnef, ohg nppbeqvat gb zl jbeq.

17:2 Naq gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ pnzr hagb uvz, fnlvat, 17:3 Trg gurr
urapr, naq ghea gurr rnfgjneq, naq uvqr gulfrys ol gur oebbx Purevgu,
gung vf orsber Wbeqna.

17:4 Naq vg funyy or, gung gubh funyg qevax bs gur oebbx; naq V unir
pbzznaqrq gur eniraf gb srrq gurr gurer.

17:5 Fb ur jrag naq qvq nppbeqvat hagb gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ: sbe ur
jrag naq qjryg ol gur oebbx Purevgu, gung vf orsber Wbeqna.

17:6 Naq gur eniraf oebhtug uvz oernq naq syrfu va gur zbeavat, naq
oernq naq syrfu va gur riravat; naq ur qenax bs gur oebbx.

17:7 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre n juvyr, gung gur oebbx qevrq hc,
orpnhfr gurer unq orra ab enva va gur ynaq.

17:8 Naq gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ pnzr hagb uvz, fnlvat, 17:9 Nevfr, trg
gurr gb Mnercungu, juvpu orybatrgu gb Mvqba, naq qjryy gurer: orubyq,
V unir pbzznaqrq n jvqbj jbzna gurer gb fhfgnva gurr.

17:10 Fb ur nebfr naq jrag gb Mnercungu. Naq jura ur pnzr gb gur tngr
bs gur pvgl, orubyq, gur jvqbj jbzna jnf gurer tngurevat bs fgvpxf:
naq ur pnyyrq gb ure, naq fnvq, Srgpu zr, V cenl gurr, n yvggyr jngre
va n irffry, gung V znl qevax.

17:11 Naq nf fur jnf tbvat gb srgpu vg, ur pnyyrq gb ure, naq fnvq,
Oevat zr, V cenl gurr, n zbefry bs oernq va guvar unaq.

17:12 Naq fur fnvq, Nf gur YBEQ gul Tbq yvirgu, V unir abg n pnxr, ohg
na unaqshy bs zrny va n oneery, naq n yvggyr bvy va n pehfr: naq,
orubyq, V nz tngurevat gjb fgvpxf, gung V znl tb va naq qerff vg sbe
zr naq zl fba, gung jr znl rng vg, naq qvr.

17:13 Naq Ryvwnu fnvq hagb ure, Srne abg; tb naq qb nf gubh unfg fnvq:
ohg znxr zr gurerbs n yvggyr pnxr svefg, naq oevat vg hagb zr, naq
nsgre znxr sbe gurr naq sbe gul fba.

17:14 Sbe guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, Gur oneery bs zrny funyy
abg jnfgr, arvgure funyy gur pehfr bs bvy snvy, hagvy gur qnl gung gur
YBEQ fraqrgu enva hcba gur rnegu.

17:15 Naq fur jrag naq qvq nppbeqvat gb gur fnlvat bs Ryvwnu: naq fur,
naq ur, naq ure ubhfr, qvq rng znal qnlf.

17:16 Naq gur oneery bs zrny jnfgrq abg, arvgure qvq gur pehfr bs bvy
snvy, nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ, juvpu ur fcnxr ol Ryvwnu.

17:17 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre gurfr guvatf, gung gur fba bs gur
jbzna, gur zvfgerff bs gur ubhfr, sryy fvpx; naq uvf fvpxarff jnf fb
fber, gung gurer jnf ab oerngu yrsg va uvz.

17:18 Naq fur fnvq hagb Ryvwnu, Jung unir V gb qb jvgu gurr, B gubh
zna bs Tbq? neg gubh pbzr hagb zr gb pnyy zl fva gb erzrzoenapr, naq
gb fynl zl fba?  17:19 Naq ur fnvq hagb ure, Tvir zr gul fba. Naq ur
gbbx uvz bhg bs ure obfbz, naq pneevrq uvz hc vagb n ybsg, jurer ur
nobqr, naq ynvq uvz hcba uvf bja orq.

17:20 Naq ur pevrq hagb gur YBEQ, naq fnvq, B YBEQ zl Tbq, unfg gubh
nyfb oebhtug rivy hcba gur jvqbj jvgu jubz V fbwbhea, ol fynlvat ure
fba?  17:21 Naq ur fgergpurq uvzfrys hcba gur puvyq guerr gvzrf, naq
pevrq hagb gur YBEQ, naq fnvq, B YBEQ zl Tbq, V cenl gurr, yrg guvf
puvyq'f fbhy pbzr vagb uvz ntnva.

17:22 Naq gur YBEQ urneq gur ibvpr bs Ryvwnu; naq gur fbhy bs gur
puvyq pnzr vagb uvz ntnva, naq ur erivirq.

17:23 Naq Ryvwnu gbbx gur puvyq, naq oebhtug uvz qbja bhg bs gur
punzore vagb gur ubhfr, naq qryvirerq uvz hagb uvf zbgure: naq Ryvwnu
fnvq, Frr, gul fba yvirgu.

17:24 Naq gur jbzna fnvq gb Ryvwnu, Abj ol guvf V xabj gung gubh neg n
zna bs Tbq, naq gung gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ va gul zbhgu vf gehgu.

18:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre znal qnlf, gung gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ
pnzr gb Ryvwnu va gur guveq lrne, fnlvat, Tb, furj gulfrys hagb Nuno;
naq V jvyy fraq enva hcba gur rnegu.

18:2 Naq Ryvwnu jrag gb furj uvzfrys hagb Nuno. Naq gurer jnf n fber
snzvar va Fnznevn.

18:3 Naq Nuno pnyyrq Bonqvnu, juvpu jnf gur tbireabe bs uvf ubhfr.
(Abj Bonqvnu srnerq gur YBEQ terngyl: 18:4 Sbe vg jnf fb, jura Wrmrory
phg bss gur cebcurgf bs gur YBEQ, gung Bonqvnu gbbx na uhaqerq
cebcurgf, naq uvq gurz ol svsgl va n pnir, naq srq gurz jvgu oernq naq
jngre.)  18:5 Naq Nuno fnvq hagb Bonqvnu, Tb vagb gur ynaq, hagb nyy
sbhagnvaf bs jngre, naq hagb nyy oebbxf: crenqiragher jr znl svaq
tenff gb fnir gur ubefrf naq zhyrf nyvir, gung jr ybfr abg nyy gur
ornfgf.

18:6 Fb gurl qvivqrq gur ynaq orgjrra gurz gb cnff guebhtubhg vg: Nuno
jrag bar jnl ol uvzfrys, naq Bonqvnu jrag nabgure jnl ol uvzfrys.

18:7 Naq nf Bonqvnu jnf va gur jnl, orubyq, Ryvwnu zrg uvz: naq ur
xarj uvz, naq sryy ba uvf snpr, naq fnvq, Neg gubh gung zl ybeq
Ryvwnu?  18:8 Naq ur nafjrerq uvz, V nz: tb, gryy gul ybeq, Orubyq,
Ryvwnu vf urer.

18:9 Naq ur fnvq, Jung unir V fvaarq, gung gubh jbhyqrfg qryvire gul
freinag vagb gur unaq bs Nuno, gb fynl zr?  18:10 Nf gur YBEQ gul Tbq
yvirgu, gurer vf ab angvba be xvatqbz, juvgure zl ybeq ungu abg frag
gb frrx gurr: naq jura gurl fnvq, Ur vf abg gurer; ur gbbx na bngu bs
gur xvatqbz naq angvba, gung gurl sbhaq gurr abg.

18:11 Naq abj gubh fnlrfg, Tb, gryy gul ybeq, Orubyq, Ryvwnu vf urer.

18:12 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, nf fbba nf V nz tbar sebz gurr, gung
gur Fcvevg bs gur YBEQ funyy pneel gurr juvgure V xabj abg; naq fb
jura V pbzr naq gryy Nuno, naq ur pnaabg svaq gurr, ur funyy fynl zr:
ohg V gul freinag srne gur YBEQ sebz zl lbhgu.

18:13 Jnf vg abg gbyq zl ybeq jung V qvq jura Wrmrory fyrj gur
cebcurgf bs gur YBEQ, ubj V uvq na uhaqerq zra bs gur YBEQ'f cebcurgf
ol svsgl va n pnir, naq srq gurz jvgu oernq naq jngre?  18:14 Naq abj
gubh fnlrfg, Tb, gryy gul ybeq, Orubyq, Ryvwnu vf urer: naq ur funyy
fynl zr.

18:15 Naq Ryvwnu fnvq, Nf gur YBEQ bs ubfgf yvirgu, orsber jubz V
fgnaq, V jvyy fheryl furj zlfrys hagb uvz gb qnl.

18:16 Fb Bonqvnu jrag gb zrrg Nuno, naq gbyq uvz: naq Nuno jrag gb
zrrg Ryvwnu.

18:17 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Nuno fnj Ryvwnu, gung Nuno fnvq hagb
uvz, Neg gubh ur gung gebhoyrgu Vfenry?  18:18 Naq ur nafjrerq, V unir
abg gebhoyrq Vfenry; ohg gubh, naq gul sngure'f ubhfr, va gung lr unir
sbefnxra gur pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ, naq gubh unfg sbyybjrq Onnyvz.

18:19 Abj gurersber fraq, naq tngure gb zr nyy Vfenry hagb zbhag
Pnezry, naq gur cebcurgf bs Onny sbhe uhaqerq naq svsgl, naq gur
cebcurgf bs gur tebirf sbhe uhaqerq, juvpu rng ng Wrmrory'f gnoyr.

18:20 Fb Nuno frag hagb nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq tngurerq gur
cebcurgf gbtrgure hagb zbhag Pnezry.

18:21 Naq Ryvwnu pnzr hagb nyy gur crbcyr, naq fnvq, Ubj ybat unyg lr
orgjrra gjb bcvavbaf? vs gur YBEQ or Tbq, sbyybj uvz: ohg vs Onny,
gura sbyybj uvz. Naq gur crbcyr nafjrerq uvz abg n jbeq.

18:22 Gura fnvq Ryvwnu hagb gur crbcyr, V, rira V bayl, erznva n
cebcurg bs gur YBEQ; ohg Onny'f cebcurgf ner sbhe uhaqerq naq svsgl
zra.

18:23 Yrg gurz gurersber tvir hf gjb ohyybpxf; naq yrg gurz pubbfr bar
ohyybpx sbe gurzfryirf, naq phg vg va cvrprf, naq ynl vg ba jbbq, naq
chg ab sver haqre: naq V jvyy qerff gur bgure ohyybpx, naq ynl vg ba
jbbq, naq chg ab sver haqre: 18:24 Naq pnyy lr ba gur anzr bs lbhe
tbqf, naq V jvyy pnyy ba gur anzr bs gur YBEQ: naq gur Tbq gung
nafjrergu ol sver, yrg uvz or Tbq. Naq nyy gur crbcyr nafjrerq naq
fnvq, Vg vf jryy fcbxra.

18:25 Naq Ryvwnu fnvq hagb gur cebcurgf bs Onny, Pubbfr lbh bar
ohyybpx sbe lbhefryirf, naq qerff vg svefg; sbe lr ner znal; naq pnyy
ba gur anzr bs lbhe tbqf, ohg chg ab sver haqre.

18:26 Naq gurl gbbx gur ohyybpx juvpu jnf tvira gurz, naq gurl qerffrq
vg, naq pnyyrq ba gur anzr bs Onny sebz zbeavat rira hagvy abba,
fnlvat, B Onny, urne hf. Ohg gurer jnf ab ibvpr, abe nal gung
nafjrerq. Naq gurl yrncrq hcba gur nygne juvpu jnf znqr.

18:27 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng abba, gung Ryvwnu zbpxrq gurz, naq fnvq,
Pel nybhq: sbe ur vf n tbq; rvgure ur vf gnyxvat, be ur vf chefhvat,
be ur vf va n wbhearl, be crenqiragher ur fyrrcrgu, naq zhfg or
njnxrq.

18:28 Naq gurl pevrq nybhq, naq phg gurzfryirf nsgre gurve znaare jvgu
xavirf naq ynaprgf, gvyy gur oybbq thfurq bhg hcba gurz.

18:29 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura zvqqnl jnf cnfg, naq gurl cebcurfvrq
hagvy gur gvzr bs gur bssrevat bs gur riravat fnpevsvpr, gung gurer
jnf arvgure ibvpr, abe nal gb nafjre, abe nal gung ertneqrq.

18:30 Naq Ryvwnu fnvq hagb nyy gur crbcyr, Pbzr arne hagb zr. Naq nyy
gur crbcyr pnzr arne hagb uvz. Naq ur ercnverq gur nygne bs gur YBEQ
gung jnf oebxra qbja.

18:31 Naq Ryvwnu gbbx gjryir fgbarf, nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs gur
gevorf bs gur fbaf bs Wnpbo, hagb jubz gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ pnzr,
fnlvat, Vfenry funyy or gul anzr: 18:32 Naq jvgu gur fgbarf ur ohvyg
na nygne va gur anzr bs gur YBEQ: naq ur znqr n gerapu nobhg gur
nygne, nf terng nf jbhyq pbagnva gjb zrnfherf bs frrq.

18:33 Naq ur chg gur jbbq va beqre, naq phg gur ohyybpx va cvrprf, naq
ynvq uvz ba gur jbbq, naq fnvq, Svyy sbhe oneeryf jvgu jngre, naq cbhe
vg ba gur oheag fnpevsvpr, naq ba gur jbbq.

18:34 Naq ur fnvq, Qb vg gur frpbaq gvzr. Naq gurl qvq vg gur frpbaq
gvzr.

Naq ur fnvq, Qb vg gur guveq gvzr. Naq gurl qvq vg gur guveq gvzr.

18:35 Naq gur jngre ena ebhaq nobhg gur nygne; naq ur svyyrq gur
gerapu nyfb jvgu jngre.

18:36 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng gur gvzr bs gur bssrevat bs gur riravat
fnpevsvpr, gung Ryvwnu gur cebcurg pnzr arne, naq fnvq, YBEQ Tbq bs
Noenunz, Vfnnp, naq bs Vfenry, yrg vg or xabja guvf qnl gung gubh neg
Tbq va Vfenry, naq gung V nz gul freinag, naq gung V unir qbar nyy
gurfr guvatf ng gul jbeq.

18:37 Urne zr, B YBEQ, urne zr, gung guvf crbcyr znl xabj gung gubh
neg gur YBEQ Tbq, naq gung gubh unfg ghearq gurve urneg onpx ntnva.

18:38 Gura gur sver bs gur YBEQ sryy, naq pbafhzrq gur oheag
fnpevsvpr, naq gur jbbq, naq gur fgbarf, naq gur qhfg, naq yvpxrq hc
gur jngre gung jnf va gur gerapu.

18:39 Naq jura nyy gur crbcyr fnj vg, gurl sryy ba gurve snprf: naq
gurl fnvq, Gur YBEQ, ur vf gur Tbq; gur YBEQ, ur vf gur Tbq.

18:40 Naq Ryvwnu fnvq hagb gurz, Gnxr gur cebcurgf bs Onny; yrg abg
bar bs gurz rfpncr. Naq gurl gbbx gurz: naq Ryvwnu oebhtug gurz qbja
gb gur oebbx Xvfuba, naq fyrj gurz gurer.

18:41 Naq Ryvwnu fnvq hagb Nuno, Trg gurr hc, rng naq qevax; sbe gurer
vf n fbhaq bs nohaqnapr bs enva.

18:42 Fb Nuno jrag hc gb rng naq gb qevax. Naq Ryvwnu jrag hc gb gur
gbc bs Pnezry; naq ur pnfg uvzfrys qbja hcba gur rnegu, naq chg uvf
snpr orgjrra uvf xarrf, 18:43 Naq fnvq gb uvf freinag, Tb hc abj, ybbx
gbjneq gur frn. Naq ur jrag hc, naq ybbxrq, naq fnvq, Gurer vf
abguvat. Naq ur fnvq, Tb ntnva frira gvzrf.

18:44 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng gur friragu gvzr, gung ur fnvq, Orubyq,
gurer nevfrgu n yvggyr pybhq bhg bs gur frn, yvxr n zna'f unaq. Naq ur
fnvq, Tb hc, fnl hagb Nuno, Cercner gul punevbg, naq trg gurr qbja
gung gur enva fgbc gurr abg.

18:45 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gur zrna juvyr, gung gur urnira jnf oynpx
jvgu pybhqf naq jvaq, naq gurer jnf n terng enva. Naq Nuno ebqr, naq
jrag gb Wrmerry.

18:46 Naq gur unaq bs gur YBEQ jnf ba Ryvwnu; naq ur tveqrq hc uvf
ybvaf, naq ena orsber Nuno gb gur ragenapr bs Wrmerry.

19:1 Naq Nuno gbyq Wrmrory nyy gung Ryvwnu unq qbar, naq jvguny ubj ur
unq fynva nyy gur cebcurgf jvgu gur fjbeq.

19:2 Gura Wrmrory frag n zrffratre hagb Ryvwnu, fnlvat, Fb yrg gur
tbqf qb gb zr, naq zber nyfb, vs V znxr abg gul yvsr nf gur yvsr bs
bar bs gurz ol gb zbeebj nobhg guvf gvzr.

19:3 Naq jura ur fnj gung, ur nebfr, naq jrag sbe uvf yvsr, naq pnzr
gb Orrefuron, juvpu orybatrgu gb Whqnu, naq yrsg uvf freinag gurer.

19:4 Ohg ur uvzfrys jrag n qnl'f wbhearl vagb gur jvyqrearff, naq pnzr
naq fng qbja haqre n whavcre gerr: naq ur erdhrfgrq sbe uvzfrys gung
ur zvtug qvr; naq fnvq, Vg vf rabhtu; abj, B YBEQ, gnxr njnl zl yvsr;
sbe V nz abg orggre guna zl snguref.

19:5 Naq nf ur ynl naq fyrcg haqre n whavcre gerr, orubyq, gura na
natry gbhpurq uvz, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Nevfr naq rng.

19:6 Naq ur ybbxrq, naq, orubyq, gurer jnf n pnxr onxra ba gur pbnyf,
naq n pehfr bs jngre ng uvf urnq. Naq ur qvq rng naq qevax, naq ynvq
uvz qbja ntnva.

19:7 Naq gur natry bs gur YBEQ pnzr ntnva gur frpbaq gvzr, naq gbhpurq
uvz, naq fnvq, Nevfr naq rng; orpnhfr gur wbhearl vf gbb terng sbe
gurr.

19:8 Naq ur nebfr, naq qvq rng naq qevax, naq jrag va gur fgeratgu bs
gung zrng sbegl qnlf naq sbegl avtugf hagb Ubero gur zbhag bs Tbq.

19:9 Naq ur pnzr guvgure hagb n pnir, naq ybqtrq gurer; naq, orubyq,
gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ pnzr gb uvz, naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Jung qbrfg
gubh urer, Ryvwnu?  19:10 Naq ur fnvq, V unir orra irel wrnybhf sbe
gur YBEQ Tbq bs ubfgf: sbe gur puvyqera bs Vfenry unir sbefnxra gul
pbiranag, guebja qbja guvar nygnef, naq fynva gul cebcurgf jvgu gur
fjbeq; naq V, rira V bayl, nz yrsg; naq gurl frrx zl yvsr, gb gnxr vg
njnl.

19:11 Naq ur fnvq, Tb sbegu, naq fgnaq hcba gur zbhag orsber gur YBEQ.

Naq, orubyq, gur YBEQ cnffrq ol, naq n terng naq fgebat jvaq erag gur
zbhagnvaf, naq oenxr va cvrprf gur ebpxf orsber gur YBEQ; ohg gur YBEQ
jnf abg va gur jvaq: naq nsgre gur jvaq na rnegudhnxr; ohg gur YBEQ
jnf abg va gur rnegudhnxr: 19:12 Naq nsgre gur rnegudhnxr n sver; ohg
gur YBEQ jnf abg va gur sver: naq nsgre gur sver n fgvyy fznyy ibvpr.

19:13 Naq vg jnf fb, jura Ryvwnu urneq vg, gung ur jenccrq uvf snpr va
uvf znagyr, naq jrag bhg, naq fgbbq va gur ragrevat va bs gur pnir.
Naq, orubyq, gurer pnzr n ibvpr hagb uvz, naq fnvq, Jung qbrfg gubh
urer, Ryvwnu?  19:14 Naq ur fnvq, V unir orra irel wrnybhf sbe gur
YBEQ Tbq bs ubfgf: orpnhfr gur puvyqera bs Vfenry unir sbefnxra gul
pbiranag, guebja qbja guvar nygnef, naq fynva gul cebcurgf jvgu gur
fjbeq; naq V, rira V bayl, nz yrsg; naq gurl frrx zl yvsr, gb gnxr vg
njnl.

19:15 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb uvz, Tb, erghea ba gul jnl gb gur
jvyqrearff bs Qnznfphf: naq jura gubh pbzrfg, nabvag Unmnry gb or xvat
bire Flevn: 19:16 Naq Wruh gur fba bs Avzfuv funyg gubh nabvag gb or
xvat bire Vfenry: naq Ryvfun gur fba bs Funcung bs Noryzrubynu funyg
gubh nabvag gb or cebcurg va gul ebbz.

19:17 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, gung uvz gung rfpncrgu gur fjbeq bs
Unmnry funyy Wruh fynl: naq uvz gung rfpncrgu sebz gur fjbeq bs Wruh
funyy Ryvfun fynl.

19:18 Lrg V unir yrsg zr frira gubhfnaq va Vfenry, nyy gur xarrf juvpu
unir abg objrq hagb Onny, naq rirel zbhgu juvpu ungu abg xvffrq uvz.

19:19 Fb ur qrcnegrq gurapr, naq sbhaq Ryvfun gur fba bs Funcung, jub
jnf cybjvat jvgu gjryir lbxr bs bkra orsber uvz, naq ur jvgu gur
gjrysgu: naq Ryvwnu cnffrq ol uvz, naq pnfg uvf znagyr hcba uvz.

19:20 Naq ur yrsg gur bkra, naq ena nsgre Ryvwnu, naq fnvq, Yrg zr, V
cenl gurr, xvff zl sngure naq zl zbgure, naq gura V jvyy sbyybj gurr.
Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Tb onpx ntnva: sbe jung unir V qbar gb gurr?
19:21 Naq ur erghearq onpx sebz uvz, naq gbbx n lbxr bs bkra, naq fyrj
gurz, naq obvyrq gurve syrfu jvgu gur vafgehzragf bs gur bkra, naq
tnir hagb gur crbcyr, naq gurl qvq rng. Gura ur nebfr, naq jrag nsgre
Ryvwnu, naq zvavfgrerq hagb uvz.

20:1 Naq Oraunqnq gur xvat bs Flevn tngurerq nyy uvf ubfg gbtrgure:
naq gurer jrer guvegl naq gjb xvatf jvgu uvz, naq ubefrf, naq
punevbgf; naq ur jrag hc naq orfvrtrq Fnznevn, naq jneerq ntnvafg vg.

20:2 Naq ur frag zrffratref gb Nuno xvat bs Vfenry vagb gur pvgl, naq
fnvq hagb uvz, Guhf fnvgu Oraunqnq, 20:3 Gul fvyire naq gul tbyq vf
zvar; gul jvirf nyfb naq gul puvyqera, rira gur tbbqyvrfg, ner zvar.

20:4 Naq gur xvat bs Vfenry nafjrerq naq fnvq, Zl ybeq, B xvat,
nppbeqvat gb gul fnlvat, V nz guvar, naq nyy gung V unir.

20:5 Naq gur zrffratref pnzr ntnva, naq fnvq, Guhf fcrnxrgu Oraunqnq,
fnlvat, Nygubhtu V unir frag hagb gurr, fnlvat, Gubh funyg qryvire zr
gul fvyire, naq gul tbyq, naq gul jvirf, naq gul puvyqera; 20:6 Lrg V
jvyy fraq zl freinagf hagb gurr gb zbeebj nobhg guvf gvzr, naq gurl
funyy frnepu guvar ubhfr, naq gur ubhfrf bs gul freinagf; naq vg funyy
or, gung jungfbrire vf cyrnfnag va guvar rlrf, gurl funyy chg vg va
gurve unaq, naq gnxr vg njnl.

20:7 Gura gur xvat bs Vfenry pnyyrq nyy gur ryqref bs gur ynaq, naq
fnvq, Znex, V cenl lbh, naq frr ubj guvf zna frrxrgu zvfpuvrs: sbe ur
frag hagb zr sbe zl jvirf, naq sbe zl puvyqera, naq sbe zl fvyire, naq
sbe zl tbyq; naq V qravrq uvz abg.

20:8 Naq nyy gur ryqref naq nyy gur crbcyr fnvq hagb uvz, Urnexra abg
hagb uvz, abe pbafrag.

20:9 Jurersber ur fnvq hagb gur zrffratref bs Oraunqnq, Gryy zl ybeq
gur xvat, Nyy gung gubh qvqfg fraq sbe gb gul freinag ng gur svefg V
jvyy qb: ohg guvf guvat V znl abg qb. Naq gur zrffratref qrcnegrq, naq
oebhtug uvz jbeq ntnva.

20:10 Naq Oraunqnq frag hagb uvz, naq fnvq, Gur tbqf qb fb hagb zr,
naq zber nyfb, vs gur qhfg bs Fnznevn funyy fhssvpr sbe unaqshyf sbe
nyy gur crbcyr gung sbyybj zr.

20:11 Naq gur xvat bs Vfenry nafjrerq naq fnvq, Gryy uvz, Yrg abg uvz
gung tveqrgu ba uvf unearff obnfg uvzfrys nf ur gung chggrgu vg bss.

20:12 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Ora-unqnq urneq guvf zrffntr, nf ur
jnf qevaxvat, ur naq gur xvatf va gur cnivyvbaf, gung ur fnvq hagb uvf
freinagf, Frg lbhefryirf va neenl. Naq gurl frg gurzfryirf va neenl
ntnvafg gur pvgl.

20:13 Naq, orubyq, gurer pnzr n cebcurg hagb Nuno xvat bs Vfenry,
fnlvat, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Unfg gubh frra nyy guvf terng zhygvghqr?
orubyq, V jvyy qryvire vg vagb guvar unaq guvf qnl; naq gubh funyg
xabj gung V nz gur YBEQ.

20:14 Naq Nuno fnvq, Ol jubz? Naq ur fnvq, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Rira
ol gur lbhat zra bs gur cevaprf bs gur cebivaprf. Gura ur fnvq, Jub
funyy beqre gur onggyr? Naq ur nafjrerq, Gubh.

20:15 Gura ur ahzorerq gur lbhat zra bs gur cevaprf bs gur cebivaprf,
naq gurl jrer gjb uhaqerq naq guvegl gjb: naq nsgre gurz ur ahzorerq
nyy gur crbcyr, rira nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, orvat frira gubhfnaq.

20:16 Naq gurl jrag bhg ng abba. Ohg Oraunqnq jnf qevaxvat uvzfrys
qehax va gur cnivyvbaf, ur naq gur xvatf, gur guvegl naq gjb xvatf
gung urycrq uvz.

20:17 Naq gur lbhat zra bs gur cevaprf bs gur cebivaprf jrag bhg
svefg; naq Oraunqnq frag bhg, naq gurl gbyq uvz, fnlvat, Gurer ner zra
pbzr bhg bs Fnznevn.

20:18 Naq ur fnvq, Jurgure gurl or pbzr bhg sbe crnpr, gnxr gurz
nyvir; be jurgure gurl or pbzr bhg sbe jne, gnxr gurz nyvir.

20:19 Fb gurfr lbhat zra bs gur cevaprf bs gur cebivaprf pnzr bhg bs
gur pvgl, naq gur nezl juvpu sbyybjrq gurz.

20:20 Naq gurl fyrj rirel bar uvf zna: naq gur Flevnaf syrq; naq
Vfenry chefhrq gurz: naq Oraunqnq gur xvat bs Flevn rfpncrq ba na
ubefr jvgu gur ubefrzra.

20:21 Naq gur xvat bs Vfenry jrag bhg, naq fzbgr gur ubefrf naq
punevbgf, naq fyrj gur Flevnaf jvgu n terng fynhtugre.

20:22 Naq gur cebcurg pnzr gb gur xvat bs Vfenry, naq fnvq hagb uvz,
Tb, fgeratgura gulfrys, naq znex, naq frr jung gubh qbrfg: sbe ng gur
erghea bs gur lrne gur xvat bs Flevn jvyy pbzr hc ntnvafg gurr.

20:23 Naq gur freinagf bs gur xvat bs Flevn fnvq hagb uvz, Gurve tbqf
ner tbqf bs gur uvyyf; gurersber gurl jrer fgebatre guna jr; ohg yrg
hf svtug ntnvafg gurz va gur cynva, naq fheryl jr funyy or fgebatre
guna gurl.

20:24 Naq qb guvf guvat, Gnxr gur xvatf njnl, rirel zna bhg bs uvf
cynpr, naq chg pncgnvaf va gurve ebbzf: 20:25 Naq ahzore gurr na nezl,
yvxr gur nezl gung gubh unfg ybfg, ubefr sbe ubefr, naq punevbg sbe
punevbg: naq jr jvyy svtug ntnvafg gurz va gur cynva, naq fheryl jr
funyy or fgebatre guna gurl. Naq ur urnexrarq hagb gurve ibvpr, naq
qvq fb.

20:26 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng gur erghea bs gur lrne, gung Oraunqnq
ahzorerq gur Flevnaf, naq jrag hc gb Ncurx, gb svtug ntnvafg Vfenry.

20:27 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jrer ahzorerq, naq jrer nyy cerfrag,
naq jrag ntnvafg gurz: naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry cvgpurq orsber gurz
yvxr gjb yvggyr sybpxf bs xvqf; ohg gur Flevnaf svyyrq gur pbhagel.

20:28 Naq gurer pnzr n zna bs Tbq, naq fcnxr hagb gur xvat bs Vfenry,
naq fnvq, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Orpnhfr gur Flevnaf unir fnvq, Gur YBEQ
vf Tbq bs gur uvyyf, ohg ur vf abg Tbq bs gur inyyrlf, gurersber jvyy
V qryvire nyy guvf terng zhygvghqr vagb guvar unaq, naq lr funyy xabj
gung V nz gur YBEQ.

20:29 Naq gurl cvgpurq bar bire ntnvafg gur bgure frira qnlf. Naq fb
vg jnf, gung va gur friragu qnl gur onggyr jnf wbvarq: naq gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry fyrj bs gur Flevnaf na uhaqerq gubhfnaq sbbgzra va
bar qnl.

20:30 Ohg gur erfg syrq gb Ncurx, vagb gur pvgl; naq gurer n jnyy sryy
hcba gjragl naq frira gubhfnaq bs gur zra gung jrer yrsg. Naq Oraunqnq
syrq, naq pnzr vagb gur pvgl, vagb na vaare punzore.

20:31 Naq uvf freinagf fnvq hagb uvz, Orubyq abj, jr unir urneq gung
gur xvatf bs gur ubhfr bs Vfenry ner zrepvshy xvatf: yrg hf, V cenl
gurr, chg fnpxpybgu ba bhe ybvaf, naq ebcrf hcba bhe urnqf, naq tb bhg
gb gur xvat bs Vfenry: crenqiragher ur jvyy fnir gul yvsr.

20:32 Fb gurl tveqrq fnpxpybgu ba gurve ybvaf, naq chg ebcrf ba gurve
urnqf, naq pnzr gb gur xvat bs Vfenry, naq fnvq, Gul freinag Oraunqnq
fnvgu, V cenl gurr, yrg zr yvir. Naq ur fnvq, Vf ur lrg nyvir? ur vf
zl oebgure.

20:33 Abj gur zra qvq qvyvtragyl bofreir jurgure nal guvat jbhyq pbzr
sebz uvz, naq qvq unfgvyl pngpu vg: naq gurl fnvq, Gul oebgure
Oraunqnq. Gura ur fnvq, Tb lr, oevat uvz. Gura Oraunqnq pnzr sbegu gb
uvz; naq ur pnhfrq uvz gb pbzr hc vagb gur punevbg.

20:34 Naq Ora-unqnq fnvq hagb uvz, Gur pvgvrf, juvpu zl sngure gbbx
sebz gul sngure, V jvyy erfgber; naq gubh funyg znxr fgerrgf sbe gurr
va Qnznfphf, nf zl sngure znqr va Fnznevn. Gura fnvq Nuno, V jvyy fraq
gurr njnl jvgu guvf pbiranag. Fb ur znqr n pbiranag jvgu uvz, naq frag
uvz njnl.

20:35 Naq n pregnva zna bs gur fbaf bs gur cebcurgf fnvq hagb uvf
arvtuobhe va gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ, Fzvgr zr, V cenl gurr. Naq gur zna
ershfrq gb fzvgr uvz.

20:36 Gura fnvq ur hagb uvz, Orpnhfr gubh unfg abg borlrq gur ibvpr bs
gur YBEQ, orubyq, nf fbba nf gubh neg qrcnegrq sebz zr, n yvba funyy
fynl gurr.

Naq nf fbba nf ur jnf qrcnegrq sebz uvz, n yvba sbhaq uvz, naq fyrj
uvz.

20:37 Gura ur sbhaq nabgure zna, naq fnvq, Fzvgr zr, V cenl gurr. Naq
gur zna fzbgr uvz, fb gung va fzvgvat ur jbhaqrq uvz.

20:38 Fb gur cebcurg qrcnegrq, naq jnvgrq sbe gur xvat ol gur jnl, naq
qvfthvfrq uvzfrys jvgu nfurf hcba uvf snpr.

20:39 Naq nf gur xvat cnffrq ol, ur pevrq hagb gur xvat: naq ur fnvq,
Gul freinag jrag bhg vagb gur zvqfg bs gur onggyr; naq, orubyq, n zna
ghearq nfvqr, naq oebhtug n zna hagb zr, naq fnvq, Xrrc guvf zna: vs
ol nal zrnaf ur or zvffvat, gura funyy gul yvsr or sbe uvf yvsr, be
ryfr gubh funyg cnl n gnyrag bs fvyire.

20:40 Naq nf gul freinag jnf ohfl urer naq gurer, ur jnf tbar. Naq gur
xvat bs Vfenry fnvq hagb uvz, Fb funyy gul whqtzrag or; gulfrys unfg
qrpvqrq vg.

20:41 Naq ur unfgrq, naq gbbx gur nfurf njnl sebz uvf snpr; naq gur
xvat bs Vfenry qvfprearq uvz gung ur jnf bs gur cebcurgf.

20:42 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Orpnhfr gubh unfg yrg
tb bhg bs gul unaq n zna jubz V nccbvagrq gb hggre qrfgehpgvba,
gurersber gul yvsr funyy tb sbe uvf yvsr, naq gul crbcyr sbe uvf
crbcyr.

20:43 Naq gur xvat bs Vfenry jrag gb uvf ubhfr urnil naq qvfcyrnfrq,
naq pnzr gb Fnznevn.

21:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre gurfr guvatf, gung Anobgu gur
Wrmerryvgr unq n ivarlneq, juvpu jnf va Wrmerry, uneq ol gur cnynpr bs
Nuno xvat bs Fnznevn.

21:2 Naq Nuno fcnxr hagb Anobgu, fnlvat, Tvir zr gul ivarlneq, gung V
znl unir vg sbe n tneqra bs ureof, orpnhfr vg vf arne hagb zl ubhfr:
naq V jvyy tvir gurr sbe vg n orggre ivarlneq guna vg; be, vs vg frrz
tbbq gb gurr, V jvyy tvir gurr gur jbegu bs vg va zbarl.

21:3 Naq Anobgu fnvq gb Nuno, Gur YBEQ sbeovq vg zr, gung V fubhyq
tvir gur vaurevgnapr bs zl snguref hagb gurr.

21:4 Naq Nuno pnzr vagb uvf ubhfr urnil naq qvfcyrnfrq orpnhfr bs gur
jbeq juvpu Anobgu gur Wrmerryvgr unq fcbxra gb uvz: sbe ur unq fnvq, V
jvyy abg tvir gurr gur vaurevgnapr bs zl snguref. Naq ur ynvq uvz qbja
hcba uvf orq, naq ghearq njnl uvf snpr, naq jbhyq rng ab oernq.

21:5 Ohg Wrmrory uvf jvsr pnzr gb uvz, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Jul vf gul
fcvevg fb fnq, gung gubh rngrfg ab oernq?  21:6 Naq ur fnvq hagb ure,
Orpnhfr V fcnxr hagb Anobgu gur Wrmerryvgr, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Tvir zr
gul ivarlneq sbe zbarl; be ryfr, vs vg cyrnfr gurr, V jvyy tvir gurr
nabgure ivarlneq sbe vg: naq ur nafjrerq, V jvyy abg tvir gurr zl
ivarlneq.

21:7 Naq Wrmrory uvf jvsr fnvq hagb uvz, Qbfg gubh abj tbirea gur
xvatqbz bs Vfenry? nevfr, naq rng oernq, naq yrg guvar urneg or zreel:
V jvyy tvir gurr gur ivarlneq bs Anobgu gur Wrmerryvgr.

21:8 Fb fur jebgr yrggref va Nuno'f anzr, naq frnyrq gurz jvgu uvf
frny, naq frag gur yrggref hagb gur ryqref naq gb gur aboyrf gung jrer
va uvf pvgl, qjryyvat jvgu Anobgu.

21:9 Naq fur jebgr va gur yrggref, fnlvat, Cebpynvz n snfg, naq frg
Anobgu ba uvtu nzbat gur crbcyr: 21:10 Naq frg gjb zra, fbaf bs
Oryvny, orsber uvz, gb orne jvgarff ntnvafg uvz, fnlvat, Gubh qvqfg
oynfcurzr Tbq naq gur xvat. Naq gura pneel uvz bhg, naq fgbar uvz,
gung ur znl qvr.

21:11 Naq gur zra bs uvf pvgl, rira gur ryqref naq gur aboyrf jub jrer
gur vaunovgnagf va uvf pvgl, qvq nf Wrmrory unq frag hagb gurz, naq nf
vg jnf jevggra va gur yrggref juvpu fur unq frag hagb gurz.

21:12 Gurl cebpynvzrq n snfg, naq frg Anobgu ba uvtu nzbat gur crbcyr.

21:13 Naq gurer pnzr va gjb zra, puvyqera bs Oryvny, naq fng orsber
uvz: naq gur zra bs Oryvny jvgarffrq ntnvafg uvz, rira ntnvafg Anobgu,
va gur cerfrapr bs gur crbcyr, fnlvat, Anobgu qvq oynfcurzr Tbq naq
gur xvat. Gura gurl pneevrq uvz sbegu bhg bs gur pvgl, naq fgbarq uvz
jvgu fgbarf, gung ur qvrq.

21:14 Gura gurl frag gb Wrmrory, fnlvat, Anobgu vf fgbarq, naq vf
qrnq.

21:15 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Wrmrory urneq gung Anobgu jnf fgbarq,
naq jnf qrnq, gung Wrmrory fnvq gb Nuno, Nevfr, gnxr cbffrffvba bs gur
ivarlneq bs Anobgu gur Wrmerryvgr, juvpu ur ershfrq gb tvir gurr sbe
zbarl: sbe Anobgu vf abg nyvir, ohg qrnq.

21:16 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Nuno urneq gung Anobgu jnf qrnq, gung
Nuno ebfr hc gb tb qbja gb gur ivarlneq bs Anobgu gur Wrmerryvgr, gb
gnxr cbffrffvba bs vg.

21:17 Naq gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ pnzr gb Ryvwnu gur Gvfuovgr, fnlvat,
21:18 Nevfr, tb qbja gb zrrg Nuno xvat bs Vfenry, juvpu vf va Fnznevn:
orubyq, ur vf va gur ivarlneq bs Anobgu, juvgure ur vf tbar qbja gb
cbffrff vg.

21:19 Naq gubh funyg fcrnx hagb uvz, fnlvat, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Unfg
gubh xvyyrq, naq nyfb gnxra cbffrffvba? Naq gubh funyg fcrnx hagb uvz,
fnlvat, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Va gur cynpr jurer qbtf yvpxrq gur oybbq
bs Anobgu funyy qbtf yvpx gul oybbq, rira guvar.

21:20 Naq Nuno fnvq gb Ryvwnu, Unfg gubh sbhaq zr, B zvar rarzl? Naq
ur nafjrerq, V unir sbhaq gurr: orpnhfr gubh unfg fbyq gulfrys gb jbex
rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ.

21:21 Orubyq, V jvyy oevat rivy hcba gurr, naq jvyy gnxr njnl gul
cbfgrevgl, naq jvyy phg bss sebz Nuno uvz gung cvffrgu ntnvafg gur
jnyy, naq uvz gung vf fuhg hc naq yrsg va Vfenry, 21:22 Naq jvyy znxr
guvar ubhfr yvxr gur ubhfr bs Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong, naq yvxr gur
ubhfr bs Onnfun gur fba bs Nuvwnu, sbe gur cebibpngvba jurerjvgu gubh
unfg cebibxrq zr gb natre, naq znqr Vfenry gb fva.

21:23 Naq bs Wrmrory nyfb fcnxr gur YBEQ, fnlvat, Gur qbtf funyy rng
Wrmrory ol gur jnyy bs Wrmerry.

21:24 Uvz gung qvrgu bs Nuno va gur pvgl gur qbtf funyy rng; naq uvz
gung qvrgu va gur svryq funyy gur sbjyf bs gur nve rng.

21:25 Ohg gurer jnf abar yvxr hagb Nuno, juvpu qvq fryy uvzfrys gb
jbex jvpxrqarff va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, jubz Wrmrory uvf jvsr
fgveerq hc.

21:26 Naq ur qvq irel nobzvanoyl va sbyybjvat vqbyf, nppbeqvat gb nyy
guvatf nf qvq gur Nzbevgrf, jubz gur YBEQ pnfg bhg orsber gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry.

21:27 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Nuno urneq gubfr jbeqf, gung ur erag
uvf pybgurf, naq chg fnpxpybgu hcba uvf syrfu, naq snfgrq, naq ynl va
fnpxpybgu, naq jrag fbsgyl.

21:28 Naq gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ pnzr gb Ryvwnu gur Gvfuovgr, fnlvat,
21:29 Frrfg gubh ubj Nuno uhzoyrgu uvzfrys orsber zr? orpnhfr ur
uhzoyrgu uvzfrys orsber zr, V jvyy abg oevat gur rivy va uvf qnlf: ohg
va uvf fba'f qnlf jvyy V oevat gur rivy hcba uvf ubhfr.

22:1 Naq gurl pbagvahrq guerr lrnef jvgubhg jne orgjrra Flevn naq
Vfenry.

22:2 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gur guveq lrne, gung Wrubfuncung gur xvat
bs Whqnu pnzr qbja gb gur xvat bs Vfenry.

22:3 Naq gur xvat bs Vfenry fnvq hagb uvf freinagf, Xabj lr gung
Enzbgu va Tvyrnq vf bhef, naq jr or fgvyy, naq gnxr vg abg bhg bs gur
unaq bs gur xvat bs Flevn?  22:4 Naq ur fnvq hagb Wrubfuncung, Jvyg
gubh tb jvgu zr gb onggyr gb Enzbgutvyrnq? Naq Wrubfuncung fnvq gb gur
xvat bs Vfenry, V nz nf gubh neg, zl crbcyr nf gul crbcyr, zl ubefrf
nf gul ubefrf.

22:5 Naq Wrubfuncung fnvq hagb gur xvat bs Vfenry, Radhver, V cenl
gurr, ng gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ gb qnl.

22:6 Gura gur xvat bs Vfenry tngurerq gur cebcurgf gbtrgure, nobhg
sbhe uhaqerq zra, naq fnvq hagb gurz, Funyy V tb ntnvafg Enzbgutvyrnq
gb onggyr, be funyy V sbeorne? Naq gurl fnvq, Tb hc; sbe gur YBEQ
funyy qryvire vg vagb gur unaq bs gur xvat.

22:7 Naq Wrubfuncung fnvq, Vf gurer abg urer n cebcurg bs gur YBEQ
orfvqrf, gung jr zvtug radhver bs uvz?  22:8 Naq gur xvat bs Vfenry
fnvq hagb Wrubfuncung, Gurer vf lrg bar zna, Zvpnvnu gur fba bs Vzynu,
ol jubz jr znl radhver bs gur YBEQ: ohg V ungr uvz; sbe ur qbgu abg
cebcurfl tbbq pbapreavat zr, ohg rivy. Naq Wrubfuncung fnvq, Yrg abg
gur xvat fnl fb.

22:9 Gura gur xvat bs Vfenry pnyyrq na bssvpre, naq fnvq, Unfgra
uvgure Zvpnvnu gur fba bs Vzynu.

22:10 Naq gur xvat bs Vfenry naq Wrubfuncung gur xvat bs Whqnu fng
rnpu ba uvf guebar, univat chg ba gurve eborf, va n ibvq cynpr va gur
ragenapr bs gur tngr bs Fnznevn; naq nyy gur cebcurgf cebcurfvrq
orsber gurz.

22:11 Naq Mrqrxvnu gur fba bs Purannanu znqr uvz ubeaf bs veba: naq ur
fnvq, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Jvgu gurfr funyg gubh chfu gur Flevnaf,
hagvy gubh unir pbafhzrq gurz.

22:12 Naq nyy gur cebcurgf cebcurfvrq fb, fnlvat, Tb hc gb
Enzbgutvyrnq, naq cebfcre: sbe gur YBEQ funyy qryvire vg vagb gur
xvat'f unaq.

22:13 Naq gur zrffratre gung jnf tbar gb pnyy Zvpnvnu fcnxr hagb uvz,
fnlvat, Orubyq abj, gur jbeqf bs gur cebcurgf qrpyner tbbq hagb gur
xvat jvgu bar zbhgu: yrg gul jbeq, V cenl gurr, or yvxr gur jbeq bs
bar bs gurz, naq fcrnx gung juvpu vf tbbq.

22:14 Naq Zvpnvnu fnvq, Nf gur YBEQ yvirgu, jung gur YBEQ fnvgu hagb
zr, gung jvyy V fcrnx.

22:15 Fb ur pnzr gb gur xvat. Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb uvz, Zvpnvnu,
funyy jr tb ntnvafg Enzbgutvyrnq gb onggyr, be funyy jr sbeorne? Naq
ur nafjrerq uvz, Tb, naq cebfcre: sbe gur YBEQ funyy qryvire vg vagb
gur unaq bs gur xvat.

22:16 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb uvz, Ubj znal gvzrf funyy V nqwher gurr
gung gubh gryy zr abguvat ohg gung juvpu vf gehr va gur anzr bs gur
YBEQ?  22:17 Naq ur fnvq, V fnj nyy Vfenry fpnggrerq hcba gur uvyyf,
nf furrc gung unir abg n furcureq: naq gur YBEQ fnvq, Gurfr unir ab
znfgre: yrg gurz erghea rirel zna gb uvf ubhfr va crnpr.

22:18 Naq gur xvat bs Vfenry fnvq hagb Wrubfuncung, Qvq V abg gryy
gurr gung ur jbhyq cebcurfl ab tbbq pbapreavat zr, ohg rivy?  22:19
Naq ur fnvq, Urne gubh gurersber gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ: V fnj gur YBEQ
fvggvat ba uvf guebar, naq nyy gur ubfg bs urnira fgnaqvat ol uvz ba
uvf evtug unaq naq ba uvf yrsg.

22:20 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq, Jub funyy crefhnqr Nuno, gung ur znl tb hc
naq snyy ng Enzbgutvyrnq? Naq bar fnvq ba guvf znaare, naq nabgure
fnvq ba gung znaare.

22:21 Naq gurer pnzr sbegu n fcvevg, naq fgbbq orsber gur YBEQ, naq
fnvq, V jvyy crefhnqr uvz.

22:22 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb uvz, Jurerjvgu? Naq ur fnvq, V jvyy tb
sbegu, naq V jvyy or n ylvat fcvevg va gur zbhgu bs nyy uvf cebcurgf.
Naq ur fnvq, Gubh funyg crefhqr uvz, naq cerinvy nyfb: tb sbegu, naq
qb fb.

22:23 Abj gurersber, orubyq, gur YBEQ ungu chg n ylvat fcvevg va gur
zbhgu bs nyy gurfr gul cebcurgf, naq gur YBEQ ungu fcbxra rivy
pbapreavat gurr.

22:24 Ohg Mrqrxvnu gur fba bs Purannanu jrag arne, naq fzbgr Zvpnvnu
ba gur purrx, naq fnvq, Juvpu jnl jrag gur Fcvevg bs gur YBEQ sebz zr
gb fcrnx hagb gurr?  22:25 Naq Zvpnvnu fnvq, Orubyq, gubh funyg frr va
gung qnl, jura gubh funyg tb vagb na vaare punzore gb uvqr gulfrys.

22:26 Naq gur xvat bs Vfenry fnvq, Gnxr Zvpnvnu, naq pneel uvz onpx
hagb Nzba gur tbireabe bs gur pvgl, naq gb Wbnfu gur xvat'f fba; 22:27
Naq fnl, Guhf fnvgu gur xvat, Chg guvf sryybj va gur cevfba, naq srrq
uvz jvgu oernq bs nssyvpgvba naq jvgu jngre bs nssyvpgvba, hagvy V
pbzr va crnpr.

22:28 Naq Zvpnvnu fnvq, Vs gubh erghea ng nyy va crnpr, gur YBEQ ungu
abg fcbxra ol zr. Naq ur fnvq, Urnexra, B crbcyr, rirel bar bs lbh.

22:29 Fb gur xvat bs Vfenry naq Wrubfuncung gur xvat bs Whqnu jrag hc
gb Enzbgutvyrnq.

22:30 Naq gur xvat bs Vfenry fnvq hagb Wrubfuncung, V jvyy qvfthvfr
zlfrys, naq ragre vagb gur onggyr; ohg chg gubh ba gul eborf. Naq gur
xvat bs Vfenry qvfthvfrq uvzfrys, naq jrag vagb gur onggyr.

22:31 Ohg gur xvat bs Flevn pbzznaqrq uvf guvegl naq gjb pncgnvaf gung
unq ehyr bire uvf punevbgf, fnlvat, Svtug arvgure jvgu fznyy abe
terng, fnir bayl jvgu gur xvat bs Vfenry.

22:32 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur pncgnvaf bs gur punevbgf fnj
Wrubfuncung, gung gurl fnvq, Fheryl vg vf gur xvat bs Vfenry. Naq gurl
ghearq nfvqr gb svtug ntnvafg uvz: naq Wrubfuncung pevrq bhg.

22:33 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur pncgnvaf bs gur punevbgf creprvirq
gung vg jnf abg gur xvat bs Vfenry, gung gurl ghearq onpx sebz
chefhvat uvz.

22:34 Naq n pregnva zna qerj n obj ng n iragher, naq fzbgr gur xvat bs
Vfenry orgjrra gur wbvagf bs gur unearff: jurersber ur fnvq hagb gur
qevire bs uvf punevbg, Ghea guvar unaq, naq pneel zr bhg bs gur ubfg;
sbe V nz jbhaqrq.

22:35 Naq gur onggyr vapernfrq gung qnl: naq gur xvat jnf fgnlrq hc va
uvf punevbg ntnvafg gur Flevnaf, naq qvrq ng rira: naq gur oybbq ena
bhg bs gur jbhaq vagb gur zvqfg bs gur punevbg.

22:36 Naq gurer jrag n cebpynzngvba guebhtubhg gur ubfg nobhg gur
tbvat qbja bs gur fha, fnlvat, Rirel zna gb uvf pvgl, naq rirel zna gb
uvf bja pbhagel.

22:37 Fb gur xvat qvrq, naq jnf oebhtug gb Fnznevn; naq gurl ohevrq
gur xvat va Fnznevn.

22:38 Naq bar jnfurq gur punevbg va gur cbby bs Fnznevn; naq gur qbtf
yvpxrq hc uvf oybbq; naq gurl jnfurq uvf nezbhe; nppbeqvat hagb gur
jbeq bs gur YBEQ juvpu ur fcnxr.

22:39 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Nuno, naq nyy gung ur qvq, naq gur
vibel ubhfr juvpu ur znqr, naq nyy gur pvgvrf gung ur ohvyg, ner gurl
abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Vfenry?
22:40 Fb Nuno fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref; naq Nunmvnu uvf fba ervtarq va
uvf fgrnq.

22:41 Naq Wrubfuncung gur fba bs Nfn ortna gb ervta bire Whqnu va gur
sbhegu lrne bs Nuno xvat bs Vfenry.

22:42 Wrubfuncung jnf guvegl naq svir lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb
ervta; naq ur ervtarq gjragl naq svir lrnef va Wrehfnyrz. Naq uvf
zbgure'f anzr jnf Nmhonu gur qnhtugre bs Fuvyuv.

22:43 Naq ur jnyxrq va nyy gur jnlf bs Nfn uvf sngure; ur ghearq abg
nfvqr sebz vg, qbvat gung juvpu jnf evtug va gur rlrf bs gur YBEQ:
arireguryrff gur uvtu cynprf jrer abg gnxra njnl; sbe gur crbcyr
bssrerq naq oheag vaprafr lrg va gur uvtu cynprf.

22:44 Naq Wrubfuncung znqr crnpr jvgu gur xvat bs Vfenry.

22:45 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Wrubfuncung, naq uvf zvtug gung ur
furjrq, naq ubj ur jneerq, ner gurl abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur
puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Whqnu?  22:46 Naq gur erzanag bs gur
fbqbzvgrf, juvpu erznvarq va gur qnlf bs uvf sngure Nfn, ur gbbx bhg
bs gur ynaq.

22:47 Gurer jnf gura ab xvat va Rqbz: n qrchgl jnf xvat.

22:48 Wrubfuncung znqr fuvcf bs Gunefuvfu gb tb gb Bcuve sbe tbyq: ohg
gurl jrag abg; sbe gur fuvcf jrer oebxra ng Rmvbatrore.

22:49 Gura fnvq Nunmvnu gur fba bs Nuno hagb Wrubfuncung, Yrg zl
freinagf tb jvgu gul freinagf va gur fuvcf. Ohg Wrubfuncung jbhyq abg.

22:50 Naq Wrubfuncung fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq jnf ohevrq jvgu uvf
snguref va gur pvgl bs Qnivq uvf sngure: naq Wrubenz uvf fba ervtarq
va uvf fgrnq.

22:51 Nunmvnu gur fba bs Nuno ortna gb ervta bire Vfenry va Fnznevn
gur friragrragu lrne bs Wrubfuncung xvat bs Whqnu, naq ervtarq gjb
lrnef bire Vfenry.

22:52 Naq ur qvq rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, naq jnyxrq va gur jnl
bs uvf sngure, naq va gur jnl bs uvf zbgure, naq va gur jnl bs
Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong, jub znqr Vfenry gb fva: 22:53 Sbe ur freirq
Onny, naq jbefuvccrq uvz, naq cebibxrq gb natre gur YBEQ Tbq bs
Vfenry, nppbeqvat gb nyy gung uvf sngure unq qbar.




Gur Frpbaq Obbx bs gur Xvatf

Pbzzbayl Pnyyrq:

Gur Sbhegu Obbx bs gur Xvatf


1:1 Gura Zbno eroryyrq ntnvafg Vfenry nsgre gur qrngu bs Nuno.

1:2 Naq Nunmvnu sryy qbja guebhtu n ynggvpr va uvf hccre punzore gung
jnf va Fnznevn, naq jnf fvpx: naq ur frag zrffratref, naq fnvq hagb
gurz, Tb, radhver bs Onnymroho gur tbq bs Rxeba jurgure V funyy
erpbire bs guvf qvfrnfr.

1:3 Ohg gur natry bs gur YBEQ fnvq gb Ryvwnu gur Gvfuovgr, Nevfr, tb
hc gb zrrg gur zrffratref bs gur xvat bs Fnznevn, naq fnl hagb gurz,
Vf vg abg orpnhfr gurer vf abg n Tbq va Vfenry, gung lr tb gb radhver
bs Onnymroho gur tbq bs Rxeba?  1:4 Abj gurersber guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ,
Gubh funyg abg pbzr qbja sebz gung orq ba juvpu gubh neg tbar hc, ohg
funyg fheryl qvr. Naq Ryvwnu qrcnegrq.

1:5 Naq jura gur zrffratref ghearq onpx hagb uvz, ur fnvq hagb gurz,
Jul ner lr abj ghearq onpx?  1:6 Naq gurl fnvq hagb uvz, Gurer pnzr n
zna hc gb zrrg hf, naq fnvq hagb hf, Tb, ghea ntnva hagb gur xvat gung
frag lbh, naq fnl hagb uvz, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Vf vg abg orpnhfr
gurer vf abg n Tbq va Vfenry, gung gubh fraqrfg gb radhver bs
Onnymroho gur tbq bs Rxeba? gurersber gubh funyg abg pbzr qbja sebz
gung orq ba juvpu gubh neg tbar hc, ohg funyg fheryl qvr.

1:7 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Jung znaare bs zna jnf ur juvpu pnzr hc gb
zrrg lbh, naq gbyq lbh gurfr jbeqf?  1:8 Naq gurl nafjrerq uvz, Ur jnf
na unvel zna, naq tveg jvgu n tveqyr bs yrngure nobhg uvf ybvaf. Naq
ur fnvq, Vg vf Ryvwnu gur Gvfuovgr.

1:9 Gura gur xvat frag hagb uvz n pncgnva bs svsgl jvgu uvf svsgl. Naq
ur jrag hc gb uvz: naq, orubyq, ur fng ba gur gbc bs na uvyy. Naq ur
fcnxr hagb uvz, Gubh zna bs Tbq, gur xvat ungu fnvq, Pbzr qbja.

1:10 Naq Ryvwnu nafjrerq naq fnvq gb gur pncgnva bs svsgl, Vs V or n
zna bs Tbq, gura yrg sver pbzr qbja sebz urnira, naq pbafhzr gurr naq
gul svsgl.

Naq gurer pnzr qbja sver sebz urnira, naq pbafhzrq uvz naq uvf svsgl.

1:11 Ntnva nyfb ur frag hagb uvz nabgure pncgnva bs svsgl jvgu uvf
svsgl.

Naq ur nafjrerq naq fnvq hagb uvz, B zna bs Tbq, guhf ungu gur xvat
fnvq, Pbzr qbja dhvpxyl.

1:12 Naq Ryvwnu nafjrerq naq fnvq hagb gurz, Vs V or n zna bs Tbq, yrg
sver pbzr qbja sebz urnira, naq pbafhzr gurr naq gul svsgl. Naq gur
sver bs Tbq pnzr qbja sebz urnira, naq pbafhzrq uvz naq uvf svsgl.

1:13 Naq ur frag ntnva n pncgnva bs gur guveq svsgl jvgu uvf svsgl.
Naq gur guveq pncgnva bs svsgl jrag hc, naq pnzr naq sryy ba uvf xarrf
orsber Ryvwnu, naq orfbhtug uvz, naq fnvq hagb uvz, B zna bs Tbq, V
cenl gurr, yrg zl yvsr, naq gur yvsr bs gurfr svsgl gul freinagf, or
cerpvbhf va gul fvtug.

1:14 Orubyq, gurer pnzr sver qbja sebz urnira, naq oheag hc gur gjb
pncgnvaf bs gur sbezre svsgvrf jvgu gurve svsgvrf: gurersber yrg zl
yvsr abj or cerpvbhf va gul fvtug.

1:15 Naq gur natry bs gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Ryvwnu, Tb qbja jvgu uvz: or
abg nsenvq bs uvz. Naq ur nebfr, naq jrag qbja jvgu uvz hagb gur xvat.

1:16 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Sbenfzhpu nf gubh unfg
frag zrffratref gb radhver bs Onnymroho gur tbq bs Rxeba, vf vg abg
orpnhfr gurer vf ab Tbq va Vfenry gb radhver bs uvf jbeq? gurersber
gubh funyg abg pbzr qbja bss gung orq ba juvpu gubh neg tbar hc, ohg
funyg fheryl qvr.

1:17 Fb ur qvrq nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ juvpu Ryvwnu unq
fcbxra.

Naq Wrubenz ervtarq va uvf fgrnq va gur frpbaq lrne bs Wrubenz gur fba
bs Wrubfuncung xvat bs Whqnu; orpnhfr ur unq ab fba.

1:18 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Nunmvnu juvpu ur qvq, ner gurl abg
jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Vfenry?  2:1 Naq
vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur YBEQ jbhyq gnxr hc Ryvwnu vagb urnira ol n
juveyjvaq, gung Ryvwnu jrag jvgu Ryvfun sebz Tvytny.

2:2 Naq Ryvwnu fnvq hagb Ryvfun, Gneel urer, V cenl gurr; sbe gur YBEQ
ungu frag zr gb Orgury. Naq Ryvfun fnvq hagb uvz, Nf gur YBEQ yvirgu,
naq nf gul fbhy yvirgu, V jvyy abg yrnir gurr. Fb gurl jrag qbja gb
Orgury.

2:3 Naq gur fbaf bs gur cebcurgf gung jrer ng Orgury pnzr sbegu gb
Ryvfun, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Xabjrfg gubh gung gur YBEQ jvyy gnxr njnl
gul znfgre sebz gul urnq gb qnl? Naq ur fnvq, Lrn, V xabj vg; ubyq lr
lbhe crnpr.

2:4 Naq Ryvwnu fnvq hagb uvz, Ryvfun, gneel urer, V cenl gurr; sbe gur
YBEQ ungu frag zr gb Wrevpub. Naq ur fnvq, Nf gur YBEQ yvirgu, naq nf
gul fbhy yvirgu, V jvyy abg yrnir gurr. Fb gurl pnzr gb Wrevpub.

2:5 Naq gur fbaf bs gur cebcurgf gung jrer ng Wrevpub pnzr gb Ryvfun,
naq fnvq hagb uvz, Xabjrfg gubh gung gur YBEQ jvyy gnxr njnl gul
znfgre sebz gul urnq gb qnl? Naq ur nafjrerq, Lrn, V xabj vg; ubyq lr
lbhe crnpr.

2:6 Naq Ryvwnu fnvq hagb uvz, Gneel, V cenl gurr, urer; sbe gur YBEQ
ungu frag zr gb Wbeqna. Naq ur fnvq, Nf gur YBEQ yvirgu, naq nf gul
fbhy yvirgu, V jvyy abg yrnir gurr. Naq gurl gjb jrag ba.

2:7 Naq svsgl zra bs gur fbaf bs gur cebcurgf jrag, naq fgbbq gb ivrj
nsne bss: naq gurl gjb fgbbq ol Wbeqna.

2:8 Naq Ryvwnu gbbx uvf znagyr, naq jenccrq vg gbtrgure, naq fzbgr gur
jngref, naq gurl jrer qvivqrq uvgure naq guvgure, fb gung gurl gjb
jrag bire ba qel tebhaq.

2:9 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gurl jrer tbar bire, gung Ryvwnu fnvq
hagb Ryvfun, Nfx jung V funyy qb sbe gurr, orsber V or gnxra njnl sebz
gurr. Naq Ryvfun fnvq, V cenl gurr, yrg n qbhoyr cbegvba bs gul fcvevg
or hcba zr.

2:10 Naq ur fnvq, Gubh unfg nfxrq n uneq guvat: arireguryrff, vs gubh
frr zr jura V nz gnxra sebz gurr, vg funyy or fb hagb gurr; ohg vs
abg, vg funyy abg or fb.

2:11 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf gurl fgvyy jrag ba, naq gnyxrq, gung,
orubyq, gurer nccrnerq n punevbg bs sver, naq ubefrf bs sver, naq
cnegrq gurz obgu nfhaqre; naq Ryvwnu jrag hc ol n juveyjvaq vagb
urnira.

2:12 Naq Ryvfun fnj vg, naq ur pevrq, Zl sngure, zl sngure, gur
punevbg bs Vfenry, naq gur ubefrzra gurerbs. Naq ur fnj uvz ab zber:
naq ur gbbx ubyq bs uvf bja pybgurf, naq erag gurz va gjb cvrprf.

2:13 Ur gbbx hc nyfb gur znagyr bs Ryvwnu gung sryy sebz uvz, naq jrag
onpx, naq fgbbq ol gur onax bs Wbeqna; 2:14 Naq ur gbbx gur znagyr bs
Ryvwnu gung sryy sebz uvz, naq fzbgr gur jngref, naq fnvq, Jurer vf
gur YBEQ Tbq bs Ryvwnu? naq jura ur nyfb unq fzvggra gur jngref, gurl
cnegrq uvgure naq guvgure: naq Ryvfun jrag bire.

2:15 Naq jura gur fbaf bs gur cebcurgf juvpu jrer gb ivrj ng Wrevpub
fnj uvz, gurl fnvq, Gur fcvevg bs Ryvwnu qbgu erfg ba Ryvfun. Naq gurl
pnzr gb zrrg uvz, naq objrq gurzfryirf gb gur tebhaq orsber uvz.

2:16 Naq gurl fnvq hagb uvz, Orubyq abj, gurer or jvgu gul freinagf
svsgl fgebat zra; yrg gurz tb, jr cenl gurr, naq frrx gul znfgre: yrfg
crenqiragher gur Fcvevg bs gur YBEQ ungu gnxra uvz hc, naq pnfg uvz
hcba fbzr zbhagnva, be vagb fbzr inyyrl. Naq ur fnvq, Lr funyy abg
fraq.

2:17 Naq jura gurl hetrq uvz gvyy ur jnf nfunzrq, ur fnvq, Fraq. Gurl
frag gurersber svsgl zra; naq gurl fbhtug guerr qnlf, ohg sbhaq uvz
abg.

2:18 Naq jura gurl pnzr ntnva gb uvz, (sbe ur gneevrq ng Wrevpub,) ur
fnvq hagb gurz, Qvq V abg fnl hagb lbh, Tb abg?  2:19 Naq gur zra bs
gur pvgl fnvq hagb Ryvfun, Orubyq, V cenl gurr, gur fvghngvba bs guvf
pvgl vf cyrnfnag, nf zl ybeq frrgu: ohg gur jngre vf anhtug, naq gur
tebhaq oneera.

2:20 Naq ur fnvq, Oevat zr n arj pehfr, naq chg fnyg gurerva. Naq gurl
oebhtug vg gb uvz.

2:21 Naq ur jrag sbegu hagb gur fcevat bs gur jngref, naq pnfg gur
fnyg va gurer, naq fnvq, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, V unir urnyrq gurfr
jngref; gurer funyy abg or sebz gurapr nal zber qrngu be oneera ynaq.

2:22 Fb gur jngref jrer urnyrq hagb guvf qnl, nppbeqvat gb gur fnlvat
bs Ryvfun juvpu ur fcnxr.

2:23 Naq ur jrag hc sebz gurapr hagb Orgury: naq nf ur jnf tbvat hc ol
gur jnl, gurer pnzr sbegu yvggyr puvyqera bhg bs gur pvgl, naq zbpxrq
uvz, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Tb hc, gubh onyq urnq; tb hc, gubh onyq urnq.

2:24 Naq ur ghearq onpx, naq ybbxrq ba gurz, naq phefrq gurz va gur
anzr bs gur YBEQ. Naq gurer pnzr sbegu gjb fur ornef bhg bs gur jbbq,
naq gner sbegl naq gjb puvyqera bs gurz.

2:25 Naq ur jrag sebz gurapr gb zbhag Pnezry, naq sebz gurapr ur
erghearq gb Fnznevn.

3:1 Abj Wrubenz gur fba bs Nuno ortna gb ervta bire Vfenry va Fnznevn
gur rvtugrragu lrne bs Wrubfuncung xvat bs Whqnu, naq ervtarq gjryir
lrnef.

3:2 Naq ur jebhtug rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ; ohg abg yvxr uvf
sngure, naq yvxr uvf zbgure: sbe ur chg njnl gur vzntr bs Onny gung
uvf sngure unq znqr.

3:3 Arireguryrff ur pyrnirq hagb gur fvaf bs Wrebobnz gur fba bs
Arong, juvpu znqr Vfenry gb fva; ur qrcnegrq abg gurersebz.

3:4 Naq Zrfun xvat bs Zbno jnf n furrcznfgre, naq eraqrerq hagb gur
xvat bs Vfenry na uhaqerq gubhfnaq ynzof, naq na uhaqerq gubhfnaq
enzf, jvgu gur jbby.

3:5 Ohg vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Nuno jnf qrnq, gung gur xvat bs Zbno
eroryyrq ntnvafg gur xvat bs Vfenry.

3:6 Naq xvat Wrubenz jrag bhg bs Fnznevn gur fnzr gvzr, naq ahzorerq
nyy Vfenry.

3:7 Naq ur jrag naq frag gb Wrubfuncung gur xvat bs Whqnu, fnlvat, Gur
xvat bs Zbno ungu eroryyrq ntnvafg zr: jvyg gubh tb jvgu zr ntnvafg
Zbno gb onggyr? Naq ur fnvq, V jvyy tb hc: V nz nf gubh neg, zl crbcyr
nf gul crbcyr, naq zl ubefrf nf gul ubefrf.

3:8 Naq ur fnvq, Juvpu jnl funyy jr tb hc? Naq ur nafjrerq, Gur jnl
guebhtu gur jvyqrearff bs Rqbz.

3:9 Fb gur xvat bs Vfenry jrag, naq gur xvat bs Whqnu, naq gur xvat bs
Rqbz: naq gurl srgpurq n pbzcnff bs frira qnlf' wbhearl: naq gurer jnf
ab jngre sbe gur ubfg, naq sbe gur pnggyr gung sbyybjrq gurz.

3:10 Naq gur xvat bs Vfenry fnvq, Nynf! gung gur YBEQ ungu pnyyrq
gurfr guerr xvatf gbtrgure, gb qryvire gurz vagb gur unaq bs Zbno!
3:11 Ohg Wrubfuncung fnvq, Vf gurer abg urer n cebcurg bs gur YBEQ,
gung jr znl radhver bs gur YBEQ ol uvz? Naq bar bs gur xvat bs
Vfenry'f freinagf nafjrerq naq fnvq, Urer vf Ryvfun gur fba bs
Funcung, juvpu cbherq jngre ba gur unaqf bs Ryvwnu.

3:12 Naq Wrubfuncung fnvq, Gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ vf jvgu uvz. Fb gur
xvat bs Vfenry naq Wrubfuncung naq gur xvat bs Rqbz jrag qbja gb uvz.

3:13 Naq Ryvfun fnvq hagb gur xvat bs Vfenry, Jung unir V gb qb jvgu
gurr?  trg gurr gb gur cebcurgf bs gul sngure, naq gb gur cebcurgf bs
gul zbgure.

Naq gur xvat bs Vfenry fnvq hagb uvz, Anl: sbe gur YBEQ ungu pnyyrq
gurfr guerr xvatf gbtrgure, gb qryvire gurz vagb gur unaq bs Zbno.

3:14 Naq Ryvfun fnvq, Nf gur YBEQ bs ubfgf yvirgu, orsber jubz V
fgnaq, fheryl, jrer vg abg gung V ertneq gur cerfrapr bs Wrubfuncung
gur xvat bs Whqnu, V jbhyq abg ybbx gbjneq gurr, abe frr gurr.

3:15 Ohg abj oevat zr n zvafgery. Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur
zvafgery cynlrq, gung gur unaq bs gur YBEQ pnzr hcba uvz.

3:16 Naq ur fnvq, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Znxr guvf inyyrl shyy bs
qvgpurf.

3:17 Sbe guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Lr funyy abg frr jvaq, arvgure funyy lr
frr enva; lrg gung inyyrl funyy or svyyrq jvgu jngre, gung lr znl
qevax, obgu lr, naq lbhe pnggyr, naq lbhe ornfgf.

3:18 Naq guvf vf ohg n yvtug guvat va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ: ur jvyy
qryvire gur Zbnovgrf nyfb vagb lbhe unaq.

3:19 Naq lr funyy fzvgr rirel sraprq pvgl, naq rirel pubvpr pvgl, naq
funyy sryy rirel tbbq gerr, naq fgbc nyy jryyf bs jngre, naq zne rirel
tbbq cvrpr bs ynaq jvgu fgbarf.

3:20 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gur zbeavat, jura gur zrng bssrevat jnf
bssrerq, gung, orubyq, gurer pnzr jngre ol gur jnl bs Rqbz, naq gur
pbhagel jnf svyyrq jvgu jngre.

3:21 Naq jura nyy gur Zbnovgrf urneq gung gur xvatf jrer pbzr hc gb
svtug ntnvafg gurz, gurl tngurerq nyy gung jrer noyr gb chg ba nezbhe,
naq hcjneq, naq fgbbq va gur obeqre.

3:22 Naq gurl ebfr hc rneyl va gur zbeavat, naq gur fha fubar hcba gur
jngre, naq gur Zbnovgrf fnj gur jngre ba gur bgure fvqr nf erq nf
oybbq: 3:23 Naq gurl fnvq, Guvf vf oybbq: gur xvatf ner fheryl fynva,
naq gurl unir fzvggra bar nabgure: abj gurersber, Zbno, gb gur fcbvy.

3:24 Naq jura gurl pnzr gb gur pnzc bs Vfenry, gur Vfenryvgrf ebfr hc
naq fzbgr gur Zbnovgrf, fb gung gurl syrq orsber gurz: ohg gurl jrag
sbejneq fzvgvat gur Zbnovgrf, rira va gurve pbhagel.

3:25 Naq gurl orng qbja gur pvgvrf, naq ba rirel tbbq cvrpr bs ynaq
pnfg rirel zna uvf fgbar, naq svyyrq vg; naq gurl fgbccrq nyy gur
jryyf bs jngre, naq sryyrq nyy gur tbbq gerrf: bayl va Xveunenfrgu
yrsg gurl gur fgbarf gurerbs; ubjorvg gur fyvatref jrag nobhg vg, naq
fzbgr vg.

3:26 Naq jura gur xvat bs Zbno fnj gung gur onggyr jnf gbb fber sbe
uvz, ur gbbx jvgu uvz frira uhaqerq zra gung qerj fjbeqf, gb oernx
guebhtu rira hagb gur xvat bs Rqbz: ohg gurl pbhyq abg.

3:27 Gura ur gbbx uvf ryqrfg fba gung fubhyq unir ervtarq va uvf
fgrnq, naq bssrerq uvz sbe n oheag bssrevat hcba gur jnyy. Naq gurer
jnf terng vaqvtangvba ntnvafg Vfenry: naq gurl qrcnegrq sebz uvz, naq
erghearq gb gurve bja ynaq.

4:1 Abj gurer pevrq n pregnva jbzna bs gur jvirf bs gur fbaf bs gur
cebcurgf hagb Ryvfun, fnlvat, Gul freinag zl uhfonaq vf qrnq; naq gubh
xabjrfg gung gul freinag qvq srne gur YBEQ: naq gur perqvgbe vf pbzr
gb gnxr hagb uvz zl gjb fbaf gb or obaqzra.

4:2 Naq Ryvfun fnvq hagb ure, Jung funyy V qb sbe gurr? gryy zr, jung
unfg gubh va gur ubhfr? Naq fur fnvq, Guvar unaqznvq ungu abg nal
guvat va gur ubhfr, fnir n cbg bs bvy.

4:3 Gura ur fnvq, Tb, obeebj gurr irffryf noebnq bs nyy gul
arvtuobhef, rira rzcgl irffryf; obeebj abg n srj.

4:4 Naq jura gubh neg pbzr va, gubh funyg fuhg gur qbbe hcba gurr naq
hcba gul fbaf, naq funyg cbhe bhg vagb nyy gubfr irffryf, naq gubh
funyg frg nfvqr gung juvpu vf shyy.

4:5 Fb fur jrag sebz uvz, naq fuhg gur qbbe hcba ure naq hcba ure
fbaf, jub oebhtug gur irffryf gb ure; naq fur cbherq bhg.

4:6 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur irffryf jrer shyy, gung fur fnvq
hagb ure fba, Oevat zr lrg n irffry. Naq ur fnvq hagb ure, Gurer vf
abg n irffry zber. Naq gur bvy fgnlrq.

4:7 Gura fur pnzr naq gbyq gur zna bs Tbq. Naq ur fnvq, Tb, fryy gur
bvy, naq cnl gul qrog, naq yvir gubh naq gul puvyqera bs gur erfg.

4:8 Naq vg sryy ba n qnl, gung Ryvfun cnffrq gb Fuharz, jurer jnf n
terng jbzna; naq fur pbafgenvarq uvz gb rng oernq. Naq fb vg jnf, gung
nf bsg nf ur cnffrq ol, ur ghearq va guvgure gb rng oernq.

4:9 Naq fur fnvq hagb ure uhfonaq, Orubyq abj, V creprvir gung guvf vf
na ubyl zna bs Tbq, juvpu cnffrgu ol hf pbagvahnyyl.

4:10 Yrg hf znxr n yvggyr punzore, V cenl gurr, ba gur jnyy; naq yrg
hf frg sbe uvz gurer n orq, naq n gnoyr, naq n fgbby, naq n
pnaqyrfgvpx: naq vg funyy or, jura ur pbzrgu gb hf, gung ur funyy ghea
va guvgure.

4:11 Naq vg sryy ba n qnl, gung ur pnzr guvgure, naq ur ghearq vagb
gur punzore, naq ynl gurer.

4:12 Naq ur fnvq gb Trunmv uvf freinag, Pnyy guvf Fuhanzzvgr. Naq jura
ur unq pnyyrq ure, fur fgbbq orsber uvz.

4:13 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Fnl abj hagb ure, Orubyq, gubh unfg orra
pnershy sbe hf jvgu nyy guvf pner; jung vf gb or qbar sbe gurr?
jbhyqrfg gubh or fcbxra sbe gb gur xvat, be gb gur pncgnva bs gur
ubfg? Naq fur nafjrerq, V qjryy nzbat zvar bja crbcyr.

4:14 Naq ur fnvq, Jung gura vf gb or qbar sbe ure? Naq Trunmv
nafjrerq, Irevyl fur ungu ab puvyq, naq ure uhfonaq vf byq.

4:15 Naq ur fnvq, Pnyy ure. Naq jura ur unq pnyyrq ure, fur fgbbq va
gur qbbe.

4:16 Naq ur fnvq, Nobhg guvf frnfba, nppbeqvat gb gur gvzr bs yvsr,
gubh funyg rzoenpr n fba. Naq fur fnvq, Anl, zl ybeq, gubh zna bs Tbq,
qb abg yvr hagb guvar unaqznvq.

4:17 Naq gur jbzna pbaprvirq, naq oner n fba ng gung frnfba gung
Ryvfun unq fnvq hagb ure, nppbeqvat gb gur gvzr bs yvsr.

4:18 Naq jura gur puvyq jnf tebja, vg sryy ba n qnl, gung ur jrag bhg
gb uvf sngure gb gur erncref.

4:19 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvf sngure, Zl urnq, zl urnq. Naq ur fnvq gb n
ynq, Pneel uvz gb uvf zbgure.

4:20 Naq jura ur unq gnxra uvz, naq oebhtug uvz gb uvf zbgure, ur fng
ba ure xarrf gvyy abba, naq gura qvrq.

4:21 Naq fur jrag hc, naq ynvq uvz ba gur orq bs gur zna bs Tbq, naq
fuhg gur qbbe hcba uvz, naq jrag bhg.

4:22 Naq fur pnyyrq hagb ure uhfonaq, naq fnvq, Fraq zr, V cenl gurr,
bar bs gur lbhat zra, naq bar bs gur nffrf, gung V znl eha gb gur zna
bs Tbq, naq pbzr ntnva.

4:23 Naq ur fnvq, Jurersber jvyg gubh tb gb uvz gb qnl? vg vf arvgure
arj zbba, abe fnoongu. Naq fur fnvq, Vg funyy or jryy.

4:24 Gura fur fnqqyrq na nff, naq fnvq gb ure freinag, Qevir, naq tb
sbejneq; fynpx abg gul evqvat sbe zr, rkprcg V ovq gurr.

4:25 Fb fur jrag naq pnzr hagb gur zna bs Tbq gb zbhag Pnezry. Naq vg
pnzr gb cnff, jura gur zna bs Tbq fnj ure nsne bss, gung ur fnvq gb
Trunmv uvf freinag, Orubyq, lbaqre vf gung Fuhanzzvgr: 4:26 Eha abj, V
cenl gurr, gb zrrg ure, naq fnl hagb ure, Vf vg jryy jvgu gurr? vf vg
jryy jvgu gul uhfonaq? vf vg jryy jvgu gur puvyq? Naq fur nafjrerq, Vg
vf jryy: 4:27 Naq jura fur pnzr gb gur zna bs Tbq gb gur uvyy, fur
pnhtug uvz ol gur srrg: ohg Trunmv pnzr arne gb guehfg ure njnl. Naq
gur zna bs Tbq fnvq, Yrg ure nybar; sbe ure fbhy vf irkrq jvguva ure:
naq gur YBEQ ungu uvq vg sebz zr, naq ungu abg gbyq zr.

4:28 Gura fur fnvq, Qvq V qrfver n fba bs zl ybeq? qvq V abg fnl, Qb
abg qrprvir zr?  4:29 Gura ur fnvq gb Trunmv, Tveq hc gul ybvaf, naq
gnxr zl fgnss va guvar unaq, naq tb gul jnl: vs gubh zrrg nal zna,
fnyhgr uvz abg; naq vs nal fnyhgr gurr, nafjre uvz abg ntnva: naq ynl
zl fgnss hcba gur snpr bs gur puvyq.

4:30 Naq gur zbgure bs gur puvyq fnvq, Nf gur YBEQ yvirgu, naq nf gul
fbhy yvirgu, V jvyy abg yrnir gurr. Naq ur nebfr, naq sbyybjrq ure.

4:31 Naq Trunmv cnffrq ba orsber gurz, naq ynvq gur fgnss hcba gur
snpr bs gur puvyq; ohg gurer jnf arvgure ibvpr, abe urnevat. Jurersber
ur jrag ntnva gb zrrg uvz, naq gbyq uvz, fnlvat, Gur puvyq vf abg
njnxrq.

4:32 Naq jura Ryvfun jnf pbzr vagb gur ubhfr, orubyq, gur puvyq jnf
qrnq, naq ynvq hcba uvf orq.

4:33 Ur jrag va gurersber, naq fuhg gur qbbe hcba gurz gjnva, naq
cenlrq hagb gur YBEQ.

4:34 Naq ur jrag hc, naq ynl hcba gur puvyq, naq chg uvf zbhgu hcba
uvf zbhgu, naq uvf rlrf hcba uvf rlrf, naq uvf unaqf hcba uvf unaqf:
naq fgergpurq uvzfrys hcba gur puvyq; naq gur syrfu bs gur puvyq jnkrq
jnez.

4:35 Gura ur erghearq, naq jnyxrq va gur ubhfr gb naq seb; naq jrag
hc, naq fgergpurq uvzfrys hcba uvz: naq gur puvyq farrmrq frira gvzrf,
naq gur puvyq bcrarq uvf rlrf.

4:36 Naq ur pnyyrq Trunmv, naq fnvq, Pnyy guvf Fuhanzzvgr. Fb ur
pnyyrq ure. Naq jura fur jnf pbzr va hagb uvz, ur fnvq, Gnxr hc gul
fba.

4:37 Gura fur jrag va, naq sryy ng uvf srrg, naq objrq urefrys gb gur
tebhaq, naq gbbx hc ure fba, naq jrag bhg.

4:38 Naq Ryvfun pnzr ntnva gb Tvytny: naq gurer jnf n qrnegu va gur
ynaq; naq gur fbaf bs gur cebcurgf jrer fvggvat orsber uvz: naq ur
fnvq hagb uvf freinag, Frg ba gur terng cbg, naq frrgur cbggntr sbe
gur fbaf bs gur cebcurgf.

4:39 Naq bar jrag bhg vagb gur svryq gb tngure ureof, naq sbhaq n jvyq
ivar, naq tngurerq gurerbs jvyq tbheqf uvf ync shyy, naq pnzr naq
fuerq gurz vagb gur cbg bs cbggntr: sbe gurl xarj gurz abg.

4:40 Fb gurl cbherq bhg sbe gur zra gb rng. Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf
gurl jrer rngvat bs gur cbggntr, gung gurl pevrq bhg, naq fnvq, B gubh
zna bs Tbq, gurer vf qrngu va gur cbg. Naq gurl pbhyq abg rng gurerbs.

4:41 Ohg ur fnvq, Gura oevat zrny. Naq ur pnfg vg vagb gur cbg; naq ur
fnvq, Cbhe bhg sbe gur crbcyr, gung gurl znl rng. Naq gurer jnf ab
unez va gur cbg.

4:42 Naq gurer pnzr n zna sebz Onnyfunyvfun, naq oebhtug gur zna bs
Tbq oernq bs gur svefgsehvgf, gjragl ybnirf bs oneyrl, naq shyy rnef
bs pbea va gur uhfx gurerbs. Naq ur fnvq, Tvir hagb gur crbcyr, gung
gurl znl rng.

4:43 Naq uvf freivgbe fnvq, Jung, fubhyq V frg guvf orsber na uhaqerq
zra?  Ur fnvq ntnva, Tvir gur crbcyr, gung gurl znl rng: sbe guhf
fnvgu gur YBEQ, Gurl funyy rng, naq funyy yrnir gurerbs.

4:44 Fb ur frg vg orsber gurz, naq gurl qvq rng, naq yrsg gurerbs,
nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ.

5:1 Abj Annzna, pncgnva bs gur ubfg bs gur xvat bs Flevn, jnf n terng
zna jvgu uvf znfgre, naq ubabhenoyr, orpnhfr ol uvz gur YBEQ unq tvira
qryvirenapr hagb Flevn: ur jnf nyfb n zvtugl zna va inybhe, ohg ur jnf
n yrcre.

5:2 Naq gur Flevnaf unq tbar bhg ol pbzcnavrf, naq unq oebhtug njnl
pncgvir bhg bs gur ynaq bs Vfenry n yvggyr znvq; naq fur jnvgrq ba
Annzna'f jvsr.

5:3 Naq fur fnvq hagb ure zvfgerff, Jbhyq Tbq zl ybeq jrer jvgu gur
cebcurg gung vf va Fnznevn! sbe ur jbhyq erpbire uvz bs uvf yrcebfl.

5:4 Naq bar jrag va, naq gbyq uvf ybeq, fnlvat, Guhf naq guhf fnvq gur
znvq gung vf bs gur ynaq bs Vfenry.

5:5 Naq gur xvat bs Flevn fnvq, Tb gb, tb, naq V jvyy fraq n yrggre
hagb gur xvat bs Vfenry. Naq ur qrcnegrq, naq gbbx jvgu uvz gra
gnyragf bs fvyire, naq fvk gubhfnaq cvrprf bs tbyq, naq gra punatrf bs
envzrag.

5:6 Naq ur oebhtug gur yrggre gb gur xvat bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Abj jura
guvf yrggre vf pbzr hagb gurr, orubyq, V unir gurerjvgu frag Annzna zl
freinag gb gurr, gung gubh znlrfg erpbire uvz bs uvf yrcebfl.

5:7 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur xvat bs Vfenry unq ernq gur yrggre,
gung ur erag uvf pybgurf, naq fnvq, Nz V Tbq, gb xvyy naq gb znxr
nyvir, gung guvf zna qbgu fraq hagb zr gb erpbire n zna bs uvf
yrcebfl? jurersber pbafvqre, V cenl lbh, naq frr ubj ur frrxrgu n
dhneery ntnvafg zr.

5:8 Naq vg jnf fb, jura Ryvfun gur zna bs Tbq unq urneq gung gur xvat
bs Vfenry unq erag uvf pybgurf, gung ur frag gb gur xvat, fnlvat,
Jurersber unfg gubh erag gul pybgurf? yrg uvz pbzr abj gb zr, naq ur
funyy xabj gung gurer vf n cebcurg va Vfenry.

5:9 Fb Annzna pnzr jvgu uvf ubefrf naq jvgu uvf punevbg, naq fgbbq ng
gur qbbe bs gur ubhfr bs Ryvfun.

5:10 Naq Ryvfun frag n zrffratre hagb uvz, fnlvat, Tb naq jnfu va
Wbeqna frira gvzrf, naq gul syrfu funyy pbzr ntnva gb gurr, naq gubh
funyg or pyrna.

5:11 Ohg Annzna jnf jebgu, naq jrag njnl, naq fnvq, Orubyq, V gubhtug,
Ur jvyy fheryl pbzr bhg gb zr, naq fgnaq, naq pnyy ba gur anzr bs gur
YBEQ uvf Tbq, naq fgevxr uvf unaq bire gur cynpr, naq erpbire gur
yrcre.

5:12 Ner abg Nonan naq Cunecne, eviref bs Qnznfphf, orggre guna nyy
gur jngref bs Vfenry? znl V abg jnfu va gurz, naq or pyrna? Fb ur
ghearq naq jrag njnl va n entr.

5:13 Naq uvf freinagf pnzr arne, naq fcnxr hagb uvz, naq fnvq, Zl
sngure, vs gur cebcurg unq ovq gurr qb fbzr terng guvat, jbhyqrfg gubh
abg unir qbar vg? ubj zhpu engure gura, jura ur fnvgu gb gurr, Jnfu,
naq or pyrna?  5:14 Gura jrag ur qbja, naq qvccrq uvzfrys frira gvzrf
va Wbeqna, nppbeqvat gb gur fnlvat bs gur zna bs Tbq: naq uvf syrfu
pnzr ntnva yvxr hagb gur syrfu bs n yvggyr puvyq, naq ur jnf pyrna.

5:15 Naq ur erghearq gb gur zna bs Tbq, ur naq nyy uvf pbzcnal, naq
pnzr, naq fgbbq orsber uvz: naq ur fnvq, Orubyq, abj V xabj gung gurer
vf ab Tbq va nyy gur rnegu, ohg va Vfenry: abj gurersber, V cenl gurr,
gnxr n oyrffvat bs gul freinag.

5:16 Ohg ur fnvq, Nf gur YBEQ yvirgu, orsber jubz V fgnaq, V jvyy
erprvir abar. Naq ur hetrq uvz gb gnxr vg; ohg ur ershfrq.

5:17 Naq Annzna fnvq, Funyy gurer abg gura, V cenl gurr, or tvira gb
gul freinag gjb zhyrf' oheqra bs rnegu? sbe gul freinag jvyy
uraprsbegu bssre arvgure oheag bssrevat abe fnpevsvpr hagb bgure tbqf,
ohg hagb gur YBEQ.

5:18 Va guvf guvat gur YBEQ cneqba gul freinag, gung jura zl znfgre
tbrgu vagb gur ubhfr bs Evzzba gb jbefuvc gurer, naq ur yrnargu ba zl
unaq, naq V obj zlfrys va gur ubhfr bs Evzzba: jura V obj qbja zlfrys
va gur ubhfr bs Evzzba, gur YBEQ cneqba gul freinag va guvf guvat.

5:19 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Tb va crnpr. Fb ur qrcnegrq sebz uvz n
yvggyr jnl.

5:20 Ohg Trunmv, gur freinag bs Ryvfun gur zna bs Tbq, fnvq, Orubyq,
zl znfgre ungu fcnerq Annzna guvf Flevna, va abg erprvivat ng uvf
unaqf gung juvpu ur oebhtug: ohg, nf gur YBEQ yvirgu, V jvyy eha nsgre
uvz, naq gnxr fbzrjung bs uvz.

5:21 Fb Trunmv sbyybjrq nsgre Annzna. Naq jura Annzna fnj uvz ehaavat
nsgre uvz, ur yvtugrq qbja sebz gur punevbg gb zrrg uvz, naq fnvq, Vf
nyy jryy?  5:22 Naq ur fnvq, Nyy vf jryy. Zl znfgre ungu frag zr,
fnlvat, Orubyq, rira abj gurer or pbzr gb zr sebz zbhag Rcuenvz gjb
lbhat zra bs gur fbaf bs gur cebcurgf: tvir gurz, V cenl gurr, n
gnyrag bs fvyire, naq gjb punatrf bs tnezragf.

5:23 Naq Annzna fnvq, Or pbagrag, gnxr gjb gnyragf. Naq ur hetrq uvz,
naq obhaq gjb gnyragf bs fvyire va gjb ontf, jvgu gjb punatrf bs
tnezragf, naq ynvq gurz hcba gjb bs uvf freinagf; naq gurl oner gurz
orsber uvz.

5:24 Naq jura ur pnzr gb gur gbjre, ur gbbx gurz sebz gurve unaq, naq
orfgbjrq gurz va gur ubhfr: naq ur yrg gur zra tb, naq gurl qrcnegrq.

5:25 Ohg ur jrag va, naq fgbbq orsber uvf znfgre. Naq Ryvfun fnvq hagb
uvz, Jurapr pbzrfg gubh, Trunmv? Naq ur fnvq, Gul freinag jrag ab
juvgure.

5:26 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz, Jrag abg zvar urneg jvgu gurr, jura gur zna
ghearq ntnva sebz uvf punevbg gb zrrg gurr? Vf vg n gvzr gb erprvir
zbarl, naq gb erprvir tnezragf, naq byvirlneqf, naq ivarlneqf, naq
furrc, naq bkra, naq zrafreinagf, naq znvqfreinagf?  5:27 Gur yrcebfl
gurersber bs Annzna funyy pyrnir hagb gurr, naq hagb gul frrq sbe
rire. Naq ur jrag bhg sebz uvf cerfrapr n yrcre nf juvgr nf fabj.

6:1 Naq gur fbaf bs gur cebcurgf fnvq hagb Ryvfun, Orubyq abj, gur
cynpr jurer jr qjryy jvgu gurr vf gbb fgenvg sbe hf.

6:2 Yrg hf tb, jr cenl gurr, hagb Wbeqna, naq gnxr gurapr rirel zna n
ornz, naq yrg hf znxr hf n cynpr gurer, jurer jr znl qjryy. Naq ur
nafjrerq, Tb lr.

6:3 Naq bar fnvq, Or pbagrag, V cenl gurr, naq tb jvgu gul freinagf.
Naq ur nafjrerq, V jvyy tb.

6:4 Fb ur jrag jvgu gurz. Naq jura gurl pnzr gb Wbeqna, gurl phg qbja
jbbq.

6:5 Ohg nf bar jnf sryyvat n ornz, gur nkr urnq sryy vagb gur jngre:
naq ur pevrq, naq fnvq, Nynf, znfgre! sbe vg jnf obeebjrq.

6:6 Naq gur zna bs Tbq fnvq, Jurer sryy vg? Naq ur furjrq uvz gur
cynpr.

Naq ur phg qbja n fgvpx, naq pnfg vg va guvgure; naq gur veba qvq
fjvz.

6:7 Gurersber fnvq ur, Gnxr vg hc gb gurr. Naq ur chg bhg uvf unaq,
naq gbbx vg.

6:8 Gura gur xvat bs Flevn jneerq ntnvafg Vfenry, naq gbbx pbhafry
jvgu uvf freinagf, fnlvat, Va fhpu naq fhpu n cynpr funyy or zl pnzc.

6:9 Naq gur zna bs Tbq frag hagb gur xvat bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Orjner
gung gubh cnff abg fhpu n cynpr; sbe guvgure gur Flevnaf ner pbzr
qbja.

6:10 Naq gur xvat bs Vfenry frag gb gur cynpr juvpu gur zna bs Tbq
gbyq uvz naq jnearq uvz bs, naq fnirq uvzfrys gurer, abg bapr abe
gjvpr.

6:11 Gurersber gur urneg bs gur xvat bs Flevn jnf fber gebhoyrq sbe
guvf guvat; naq ur pnyyrq uvf freinagf, naq fnvq hagb gurz, Jvyy lr
abg furj zr juvpu bs hf vf sbe gur xvat bs Vfenry?  6:12 Naq bar bs
uvf freinagf fnvq, Abar, zl ybeq, B xvat: ohg Ryvfun, gur cebcurg gung
vf va Vfenry, gryyrgu gur xvat bs Vfenry gur jbeqf gung gubh fcrnxrfg
va gul orqpunzore.

6:13 Naq ur fnvq, Tb naq fcl jurer ur vf, gung V znl fraq naq srgpu
uvz.

Naq vg jnf gbyq uvz, fnlvat, Orubyq, ur vf va Qbguna.

6:14 Gurersber frag ur guvgure ubefrf, naq punevbgf, naq n terng ubfg:
naq gurl pnzr ol avtug, naq pbzcnffrq gur pvgl nobhg.

6:15 Naq jura gur freinag bs gur zna bs Tbq jnf evfra rneyl, naq tbar
sbegu, orubyq, na ubfg pbzcnffrq gur pvgl obgu jvgu ubefrf naq
punevbgf. Naq uvf freinag fnvq hagb uvz, Nynf, zl znfgre! ubj funyy jr
qb?  6:16 Naq ur nafjrerq, Srne abg: sbe gurl gung or jvgu hf ner zber
guna gurl gung or jvgu gurz.

6:17 Naq Ryvfun cenlrq, naq fnvq, YBEQ, V cenl gurr, bcra uvf rlrf,
gung ur znl frr. Naq gur YBEQ bcrarq gur rlrf bs gur lbhat zna; naq ur
fnj: naq, orubyq, gur zbhagnva jnf shyy bs ubefrf naq punevbgf bs sver
ebhaq nobhg Ryvfun.

6:18 Naq jura gurl pnzr qbja gb uvz, Ryvfun cenlrq hagb gur YBEQ, naq
fnvq, Fzvgr guvf crbcyr, V cenl gurr, jvgu oyvaqarff. Naq ur fzbgr
gurz jvgu oyvaqarff nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs Ryvfun.

6:19 Naq Ryvfun fnvq hagb gurz, Guvf vf abg gur jnl, arvgure vf guvf
gur pvgl: sbyybj zr, naq V jvyy oevat lbh gb gur zna jubz lr frrx. Ohg
ur yrq gurz gb Fnznevn.

6:20 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gurl jrer pbzr vagb Fnznevn, gung
Ryvfun fnvq, YBEQ, bcra gur rlrf bs gurfr zra, gung gurl znl frr. Naq
gur YBEQ bcrarq gurve rlrf, naq gurl fnj; naq, orubyq, gurl jrer va
gur zvqfg bs Fnznevn.

6:21 Naq gur xvat bs Vfenry fnvq hagb Ryvfun, jura ur fnj gurz, Zl
sngure, funyy V fzvgr gurz? funyy V fzvgr gurz?  6:22 Naq ur nafjrerq,
Gubh funyg abg fzvgr gurz: jbhyqrfg gubh fzvgr gubfr jubz gubh unfg
gnxra pncgvir jvgu gul fjbeq naq jvgu gul obj? frg oernq naq jngre
orsber gurz, gung gurl znl rng naq qevax, naq tb gb gurve znfgre.

6:23 Naq ur cercnerq terng cebivfvba sbe gurz: naq jura gurl unq rngra
naq qehax, ur frag gurz njnl, naq gurl jrag gb gurve znfgre. Fb gur
onaqf bs Flevn pnzr ab zber vagb gur ynaq bs Vfenry.

6:24 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre guvf, gung Oraunqnq xvat bs Flevn
tngurerq nyy uvf ubfg, naq jrag hc, naq orfvrtrq Fnznevn.

6:25 Naq gurer jnf n terng snzvar va Fnznevn: naq, orubyq, gurl
orfvrtrq vg, hagvy na nff'f urnq jnf fbyq sbe sbhefpber cvrprf bs
fvyire, naq gur sbhegu cneg bs n pno bs qbir'f qhat sbe svir cvrprf bs
fvyire.

6:26 Naq nf gur xvat bs Vfenry jnf cnffvat ol hcba gur jnyy, gurer
pevrq n jbzna hagb uvz, fnlvat, Uryc, zl ybeq, B xvat.

6:27 Naq ur fnvq, Vs gur YBEQ qb abg uryc gurr, jurapr funyy V uryc
gurr?  bhg bs gur oneasybbe, be bhg bs gur jvarcerff?  6:28 Naq gur
xvat fnvq hagb ure, Jung nvyrgu gurr? Naq fur nafjrerq, Guvf jbzna
fnvq hagb zr, Tvir gul fba, gung jr znl rng uvz gb qnl, naq jr jvyy
rng zl fba gb zbeebj.

6:29 Fb jr obvyrq zl fba, naq qvq rng uvz: naq V fnvq hagb ure ba gur
arkg qnl, Tvir gul fba, gung jr znl rng uvz: naq fur ungu uvq ure fba.

6:30 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur xvat urneq gur jbeqf bs gur jbzna,
gung ur erag uvf pybgurf; naq ur cnffrq ol hcba gur jnyy, naq gur
crbcyr ybbxrq, naq, orubyq, ur unq fnpxpybgu jvguva hcba uvf syrfu.

6:31 Gura ur fnvq, Tbq qb fb naq zber nyfb gb zr, vs gur urnq bs
Ryvfun gur fba bs Funcung funyy fgnaq ba uvz guvf qnl.

6:32 Ohg Ryvfun fng va uvf ubhfr, naq gur ryqref fng jvgu uvz; naq gur
xvat frag n zna sebz orsber uvz: ohg rer gur zrffratre pnzr gb uvz, ur
fnvq gb gur ryqref, Frr lr ubj guvf fba bs n zheqrere ungu frag gb
gnxr njnl zvar urnq? ybbx, jura gur zrffratre pbzrgu, fuhg gur qbbe,
naq ubyq uvz snfg ng gur qbbe: vf abg gur fbhaq bs uvf znfgre'f srrg
oruvaq uvz?  6:33 Naq juvyr ur lrg gnyxrq jvgu gurz, orubyq, gur
zrffratre pnzr qbja hagb uvz: naq ur fnvq, Orubyq, guvf rivy vf bs gur
YBEQ; jung fubhyq V jnvg sbe gur YBEQ nal ybatre?  7:1 Gura Ryvfun
fnvq, Urne lr gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ; Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Gb zbeebj
nobhg guvf gvzr funyy n zrnfher bs svar sybhe or fbyq sbe n furxry,
naq gjb zrnfherf bs oneyrl sbe n furxry, va gur tngr bs Fnznevn.

7:2 Gura n ybeq ba jubfr unaq gur xvat yrnarq nafjrerq gur zna bs Tbq,
naq fnvq, Orubyq, vs gur YBEQ jbhyq znxr jvaqbjf va urnira, zvtug guvf
guvat or?  Naq ur fnvq, Orubyq, gubh funyg frr vg jvgu guvar rlrf, ohg
funyg abg rng gurerbs.

7:3 Naq gurer jrer sbhe yrcebhf zra ng gur ragrevat va bs gur tngr:
naq gurl fnvq bar gb nabgure, Jul fvg jr urer hagvy jr qvr?  7:4 Vs jr
fnl, Jr jvyy ragre vagb gur pvgl, gura gur snzvar vf va gur pvgl, naq
jr funyy qvr gurer: naq vs jr fvg fgvyy urer, jr qvr nyfb. Abj
gurersber pbzr, naq yrg hf snyy hagb gur ubfg bs gur Flevnaf: vs gurl
fnir hf nyvir, jr funyy yvir; naq vs gurl xvyy hf, jr funyy ohg qvr.

7:5 Naq gurl ebfr hc va gur gjvyvtug, gb tb hagb gur pnzc bs gur
Flevnaf: naq jura gurl jrer pbzr gb gur hggrezbfg cneg bs gur pnzc bs
Flevn, orubyq, gurer jnf ab zna gurer.

7:6 Sbe gur YBEQ unq znqr gur ubfg bs gur Flevnaf gb urne n abvfr bs
punevbgf, naq n abvfr bs ubefrf, rira gur abvfr bs n terng ubfg: naq
gurl fnvq bar gb nabgure, Yb, gur xvat bs Vfenry ungu uverq ntnvafg hf
gur xvatf bs gur Uvggvgrf, naq gur xvatf bs gur Rtlcgvnaf, gb pbzr
hcba hf.

7:7 Jurersber gurl nebfr naq syrq va gur gjvyvtug, naq yrsg gurve
gragf, naq gurve ubefrf, naq gurve nffrf, rira gur pnzc nf vg jnf, naq
syrq sbe gurve yvsr.

7:8 Naq jura gurfr yrcref pnzr gb gur hggrezbfg cneg bs gur pnzc, gurl
jrag vagb bar grag, naq qvq rng naq qevax, naq pneevrq gurapr fvyire,
naq tbyq, naq envzrag, naq jrag naq uvq vg; naq pnzr ntnva, naq
ragrerq vagb nabgure grag, naq pneevrq gurapr nyfb, naq jrag naq uvq
vg.

7:9 Gura gurl fnvq bar gb nabgure, Jr qb abg jryy: guvf qnl vf n qnl
bs tbbq gvqvatf, naq jr ubyq bhe crnpr: vs jr gneel gvyy gur zbeavat
yvtug, fbzr zvfpuvrs jvyy pbzr hcba hf: abj gurersber pbzr, gung jr
znl tb naq gryy gur xvat'f ubhfrubyq.

7:10 Fb gurl pnzr naq pnyyrq hagb gur cbegre bs gur pvgl: naq gurl
gbyq gurz, fnlvat, Jr pnzr gb gur pnzc bs gur Flevnaf, naq, orubyq,
gurer jnf ab zna gurer, arvgure ibvpr bs zna, ohg ubefrf gvrq, naq
nffrf gvrq, naq gur gragf nf gurl jrer.

7:11 Naq ur pnyyrq gur cbegref; naq gurl gbyq vg gb gur xvat'f ubhfr
jvguva.

7:12 Naq gur xvat nebfr va gur avtug, naq fnvq hagb uvf freinagf, V
jvyy abj furj lbh jung gur Flevnaf unir qbar gb hf. Gurl xabj gung jr
or uhatel; gurersber ner gurl tbar bhg bs gur pnzc gb uvqr gurzfryirf
va gur svryq, fnlvat, Jura gurl pbzr bhg bs gur pvgl, jr funyy pngpu
gurz nyvir, naq trg vagb gur pvgl.

7:13 Naq bar bs uvf freinagf nafjrerq naq fnvq, Yrg fbzr gnxr, V cenl
gurr, svir bs gur ubefrf gung erznva, juvpu ner yrsg va gur pvgl,
(orubyq, gurl ner nf nyy gur zhygvghqr bs Vfenry gung ner yrsg va vg:
orubyq, V fnl, gurl ner rira nf nyy gur zhygvghqr bs gur Vfenryvgrf
gung ner pbafhzrq:) naq yrg hf fraq naq frr.

7:14 Gurl gbbx gurersber gjb punevbg ubefrf; naq gur xvat frag nsgre
gur ubfg bs gur Flevnaf, fnlvat, Tb naq frr.

7:15 Naq gurl jrag nsgre gurz hagb Wbeqna: naq, yb, nyy gur jnl jnf
shyy bs tnezragf naq irffryf, juvpu gur Flevnaf unq pnfg njnl va gurve
unfgr. Naq gur zrffratref erghearq, naq gbyq gur xvat.

7:16 Naq gur crbcyr jrag bhg, naq fcbvyrq gur gragf bs gur Flevnaf. Fb
n zrnfher bs svar sybhe jnf fbyq sbe n furxry, naq gjb zrnfherf bs
oneyrl sbe n furxry, nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ.

7:17 Naq gur xvat nccbvagrq gur ybeq ba jubfr unaq ur yrnarq gb unir
gur punetr bs gur tngr: naq gur crbcyr gebqr hcba uvz va gur tngr, naq
ur qvrq, nf gur zna bs Tbq unq fnvq, jub fcnxr jura gur xvat pnzr qbja
gb uvz.

7:18 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nf gur zna bs Tbq unq fcbxra gb gur xvat,
fnlvat, Gjb zrnfherf bs oneyrl sbe n furxry, naq n zrnfher bs svar
sybhe sbe n furxry, funyy or gb zbeebj nobhg guvf gvzr va gur tngr bs
Fnznevn: 7:19 Naq gung ybeq nafjrerq gur zna bs Tbq, naq fnvq, Abj,
orubyq, vs gur YBEQ fubhyq znxr jvaqbjf va urnira, zvtug fhpu n guvat
or? Naq ur fnvq, Orubyq, gubh funyg frr vg jvgu guvar rlrf, ohg funyg
abg rng gurerbs.

7:20 Naq fb vg sryy bhg hagb uvz: sbe gur crbcyr gebqr hcba uvz va gur
tngr, naq ur qvrq.

8:1 Gura fcnxr Ryvfun hagb gur jbzna, jubfr fba ur unq erfgberq gb
yvsr, fnlvat, Nevfr, naq tb gubh naq guvar ubhfrubyq, naq fbwbhea
jurerfbrire gubh pnafg fbwbhea: sbe gur YBEQ ungu pnyyrq sbe n snzvar;
naq vg funyy nyfb pbzr hcba gur ynaq frira lrnef.

8:2 Naq gur jbzna nebfr, naq qvq nsgre gur fnlvat bs gur zna bs Tbq:
naq fur jrag jvgu ure ubhfrubyq, naq fbwbhearq va gur ynaq bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf frira lrnef.

8:3 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng gur frira lrnef' raq, gung gur jbzna
erghearq bhg bs gur ynaq bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf: naq fur jrag sbegu gb pel
hagb gur xvat sbe ure ubhfr naq sbe ure ynaq.

8:4 Naq gur xvat gnyxrq jvgu Trunmv gur freinag bs gur zna bs Tbq,
fnlvat, Gryy zr, V cenl gurr, nyy gur terng guvatf gung Ryvfun ungu
qbar.

8:5 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf ur jnf gryyvat gur xvat ubj ur unq
erfgberq n qrnq obql gb yvsr, gung, orubyq, gur jbzna, jubfr fba ur
unq erfgberq gb yvsr, pevrq gb gur xvat sbe ure ubhfr naq sbe ure
ynaq. Naq Trunmv fnvq, Zl ybeq, B xvat, guvf vf gur jbzna, naq guvf vf
ure fba, jubz Ryvfun erfgberq gb yvsr.

8:6 Naq jura gur xvat nfxrq gur jbzna, fur gbyq uvz. Fb gur xvat
nccbvagrq hagb ure n pregnva bssvpre, fnlvat, Erfgber nyy gung jnf
uref, naq nyy gur sehvgf bs gur svryq fvapr gur qnl gung fur yrsg gur
ynaq, rira hagvy abj.

8:7 Naq Ryvfun pnzr gb Qnznfphf; naq Oraunqnq gur xvat bs Flevn jnf
fvpx; naq vg jnf gbyq uvz, fnlvat, Gur zna bs Tbq vf pbzr uvgure.

8:8 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb Unmnry, Gnxr n cerfrag va guvar unaq, naq
tb, zrrg gur zna bs Tbq, naq radhver bs gur YBEQ ol uvz, fnlvat, Funyy
V erpbire bs guvf qvfrnfr?  8:9 Fb Unmnry jrag gb zrrg uvz, naq gbbx n
cerfrag jvgu uvz, rira bs rirel tbbq guvat bs Qnznfphf, sbegl pnzryf'
oheqra, naq pnzr naq fgbbq orsber uvz, naq fnvq, Gul fba Oraunqnq xvat
bs Flevn ungu frag zr gb gurr, fnlvat, Funyy V erpbire bs guvf
qvfrnfr?  8:10 Naq Ryvfun fnvq hagb uvz, Tb, fnl hagb uvz, Gubh znlrfg
pregnvayl erpbire: ubjorvg gur YBEQ ungu furjrq zr gung ur funyy
fheryl qvr.

8:11 Naq ur frggyrq uvf pbhagranapr fgrqsnfgyl, hagvy ur jnf nfunzrq:
naq gur zna bs Tbq jrcg.

8:12 Naq Unmnry fnvq, Jul jrrcrgu zl ybeq? Naq ur nafjrerq, Orpnhfr V
xabj gur rivy gung gubh jvyg qb hagb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry: gurve
fgebat ubyqf jvyg gubh frg ba sver, naq gurve lbhat zra jvyg gubh fynl
jvgu gur fjbeq, naq jvyg qnfu gurve puvyqera, naq evc hc gurve jbzra
jvgu puvyq.

8:13 Naq Unmnry fnvq, Ohg jung, vf gul freinag n qbt, gung ur fubhyq
qb guvf terng guvat? Naq Ryvfun nafjrerq, Gur YBEQ ungu furjrq zr gung
gubh funyg or xvat bire Flevn.

8:14 Fb ur qrcnegrq sebz Ryvfun, naq pnzr gb uvf znfgre; jub fnvq gb
uvz, Jung fnvq Ryvfun gb gurr? Naq ur nafjrerq, Ur gbyq zr gung gubh
fubhyqrfg fheryl erpbire.

8:15 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ba gur zbeebj, gung ur gbbx n guvpx pybgu,
naq qvccrq vg va jngre, naq fcernq vg ba uvf snpr, fb gung ur qvrq:
naq Unmnry ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

8:16 Naq va gur svsgu lrne bs Wbenz gur fba bs Nuno xvat bs Vfenry,
Wrubfuncung orvat gura xvat bs Whqnu, Wrubenz gur fba bs Wr ubfuncung
xvat bs Whqnu ortna gb ervta.

8:17 Guvegl naq gjb lrnef byq jnf ur jura ur ortna gb ervta; naq ur
ervtarq rvtug lrnef va Wrehfnyrz.

8:18 Naq ur jnyxrq va gur jnl bs gur xvatf bs Vfenry, nf qvq gur ubhfr
bs Nuno: sbe gur qnhtugre bs Nuno jnf uvf jvsr: naq ur qvq rivy va gur
fvtug bs gur YBEQ.

8:19 Lrg gur YBEQ jbhyq abg qrfgebl Whqnu sbe Qnivq uvf freinag'f
fnxr, nf ur cebzvfrq uvz gb tvir uvz nyjnl n yvtug, naq gb uvf
puvyqera.

8:20 Va uvf qnlf Rqbz eribygrq sebz haqre gur unaq bs Whqnu, naq znqr
n xvat bire gurzfryirf.

8:21 Fb Wbenz jrag bire gb Mnve, naq nyy gur punevbgf jvgu uvz: naq ur
ebfr ol avtug, naq fzbgr gur Rqbzvgrf juvpu pbzcnffrq uvz nobhg, naq
gur pncgnvaf bs gur punevbgf: naq gur crbcyr syrq vagb gurve gragf.

8:22 Lrg Rqbz eribygrq sebz haqre gur unaq bs Whqnu hagb guvf qnl.
Gura Yvoanu eribygrq ng gur fnzr gvzr.

8:23 Naq gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Wbenz, naq nyy gung ur qvq, ner gurl
abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Whqnu?  8:24
Naq Wbenz fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq jnf ohevrq jvgu uvf snguref va
gur pvgl bs Qnivq: naq Nunmvnu uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

8:25 Va gur gjrysgu lrne bs Wbenz gur fba bs Nuno xvat bs Vfenry qvq
Nunmvnu gur fba bs Wrubenz xvat bs Whqnu ortva gb ervta.

8:26 Gjb naq gjragl lrnef byq jnf Nunmvnu jura ur ortna gb ervta; naq
ur ervtarq bar lrne va Wrehfnyrz. Naq uvf zbgure'f anzr jnf Ngunyvnu,
gur qnhtugre bs Bzev xvat bs Vfenry.

8:27 Naq ur jnyxrq va gur jnl bs gur ubhfr bs Nuno, naq qvq rivy va
gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, nf qvq gur ubhfr bs Nuno: sbe ur jnf gur fba va
ynj bs gur ubhfr bs Nuno.

8:28 Naq ur jrag jvgu Wbenz gur fba bs Nuno gb gur jne ntnvafg Unmnry
xvat bs Flevn va Enzbgutvyrnq; naq gur Flevnaf jbhaqrq Wbenz.

8:29 Naq xvat Wbenz jrag onpx gb or urnyrq va Wrmerry bs gur jbhaqf
juvpu gur Flevnaf unq tvira uvz ng Enznu, jura ur sbhtug ntnvafg
Unmnry xvat bs Flevn. Naq Nunmvnu gur fba bs Wrubenz xvat bs Whqnu
jrag qbja gb frr Wbenz gur fba bs Nuno va Wrmerry, orpnhfr ur jnf
fvpx.

9:1 Naq Ryvfun gur cebcurg pnyyrq bar bs gur puvyqera bs gur cebcurgf,
naq fnvq hagb uvz, Tveq hc gul ybvaf, naq gnxr guvf obk bs bvy va
guvar unaq, naq tb gb Enzbgutvyrnq: 9:2 Naq jura gubh pbzrfg guvgure,
ybbx bhg gurer Wruh gur fba bs Wrubfuncung gur fba bs Avzfuv, naq tb
va, naq znxr uvz nevfr hc sebz nzbat uvf oerguera, naq pneel uvz gb na
vaare punzore; 9:3 Gura gnxr gur obk bs bvy, naq cbhe vg ba uvf urnq,
naq fnl, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, V unir nabvagrq gurr xvat bire Vfenry.
Gura bcra gur qbbe, naq syrr, naq gneel abg.

9:4 Fb gur lbhat zna, rira gur lbhat zna gur cebcurg, jrag gb
Enzbgutvyrnq.

9:5 Naq jura ur pnzr, orubyq, gur pncgnvaf bs gur ubfg jrer fvggvat;
naq ur fnvq, V unir na reenaq gb gurr, B pncgnva. Naq Wruh fnvq, Hagb
juvpu bs nyy hf? Naq ur fnvq, Gb gurr, B pncgnva.

9:6 Naq ur nebfr, naq jrag vagb gur ubhfr; naq ur cbherq gur bvy ba
uvf urnq, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, V unir
nabvagrq gurr xvat bire gur crbcyr bs gur YBEQ, rira bire Vfenry.

9:7 Naq gubh funyg fzvgr gur ubhfr bs Nuno gul znfgre, gung V znl
niratr gur oybbq bs zl freinagf gur cebcurgf, naq gur oybbq bs nyy gur
freinagf bs gur YBEQ, ng gur unaq bs Wrmrory.

9:8 Sbe gur jubyr ubhfr bs Nuno funyy crevfu: naq V jvyy phg bss sebz
Nuno uvz gung cvffrgu ntnvafg gur jnyy, naq uvz gung vf fuhg hc naq
yrsg va Vfenry: 9:9 Naq V jvyy znxr gur ubhfr bs Nuno yvxr gur ubhfr
bs Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong, naq yvxr gur ubhfr bs Onnfun gur fba bs
Nuvwnu: 9:10 Naq gur qbtf funyy rng Wrmrory va gur cbegvba bs Wrmerry,
naq gurer funyy or abar gb ohel ure. Naq ur bcrarq gur qbbe, naq syrq.

9:11 Gura Wruh pnzr sbegu gb gur freinagf bs uvf ybeq: naq bar fnvq
hagb uvz, Vf nyy jryy? jurersber pnzr guvf znq sryybj gb gurr? Naq ur
fnvq hagb gurz, Lr xabj gur zna, naq uvf pbzzhavpngvba.

9:12 Naq gurl fnvq, Vg vf snyfr; gryy hf abj. Naq ur fnvq, Guhf naq
guhf fcnxr ur gb zr, fnlvat, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, V unir nabvagrq gurr
xvat bire Vfenry.

9:13 Gura gurl unfgrq, naq gbbx rirel zna uvf tnezrag, naq chg vg
haqre uvz ba gur gbc bs gur fgnvef, naq oyrj jvgu gehzcrgf, fnlvat,
Wruh vf xvat.

9:14 Fb Wruh gur fba bs Wrubfuncung gur fba bs Avzfuv pbafcverq
ntnvafg Wbenz. (Abj Wbenz unq xrcg Enzbgutvyrnq, ur naq nyy Vfenry,
orpnhfr bs Unmnry xvat bs Flevn.

9:15 Ohg xvat Wbenz jnf erghearq gb or urnyrq va Wrmerry bs gur jbhaqf
juvpu gur Flevnaf unq tvira uvz, jura ur sbhtug jvgu Unmnry xvat bs
Flevn.)  Naq Wruh fnvq, Vs vg or lbhe zvaqf, gura yrg abar tb sbegu
abe rfpncr bhg bs gur pvgl gb tb gb gryy vg va Wrmerry.

9:16 Fb Wruh ebqr va n punevbg, naq jrag gb Wrmerry; sbe Wbenz ynl
gurer.

Naq Nunmvnu xvat bs Whqnu jnf pbzr qbja gb frr Wbenz.

9:17 Naq gurer fgbbq n jngpuzna ba gur gbjre va Wrmerry, naq ur fcvrq
gur pbzcnal bs Wruh nf ur pnzr, naq fnvq, V frr n pbzcnal. Naq Wbenz
fnvq, Gnxr na ubefrzna, naq fraq gb zrrg gurz, naq yrg uvz fnl, Vf vg
crnpr?  9:18 Fb gurer jrag bar ba ubefronpx gb zrrg uvz, naq fnvq,
Guhf fnvgu gur xvat, Vf vg crnpr? Naq Wruh fnvq, Jung unfg gubh gb qb
jvgu crnpr? ghea gurr oruvaq zr. Naq gur jngpuzna gbyq, fnlvat, Gur
zrffratre pnzr gb gurz, ohg ur pbzrgu abg ntnva.

9:19 Gura ur frag bhg n frpbaq ba ubefronpx, juvpu pnzr gb gurz, naq
fnvq, Guhf fnvgu gur xvat, Vf vg crnpr? Naq Wruh nafjrerq, Jung unfg
gubh gb qb jvgu crnpr? ghea gurr oruvaq zr.

9:20 Naq gur jngpuzna gbyq, fnlvat, Ur pnzr rira hagb gurz, naq pbzrgu
abg ntnva: naq gur qevivat vf yvxr gur qevivat bs Wruh gur fba bs
Avzfuv; sbe ur qevirgu shevbhfyl.

9:21 Naq Wbenz fnvq, Znxr ernql. Naq uvf punevbg jnf znqr ernql. Naq
Wbenz xvat bs Vfenry naq Nunmvnu xvat bs Whqnu jrag bhg, rnpu va uvf
punevbg, naq gurl jrag bhg ntnvafg Wruh, naq zrg uvz va gur cbegvba bs
Anobgu gur Wrmerryvgr.

9:22 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Wbenz fnj Wruh, gung ur fnvq, Vf vg
crnpr, Wruh? Naq ur nafjrerq, Jung crnpr, fb ybat nf gur juberqbzf bs
gul zbgure Wrmrory naq ure jvgpupensgf ner fb znal?  9:23 Naq Wbenz
ghearq uvf unaqf, naq syrq, naq fnvq gb Nunmvnu, Gurer vf gernpurel, B
Nunmvnu.

9:24 Naq Wruh qerj n obj jvgu uvf shyy fgeratgu, naq fzbgr Wrubenz
orgjrra uvf nezf, naq gur neebj jrag bhg ng uvf urneg, naq ur fhax
qbja va uvf punevbg.

9:25 Gura fnvq Wruh gb Ovqxne uvf pncgnva, Gnxr hc, naq pnfg uvz va
gur cbegvba bs gur svryq bs Anobgu gur Wrmerryvgr: sbe erzrzore ubj
gung, jura V naq gubh ebqr gbtrgure nsgre Nuno uvf sngure, gur YBEQ
ynvq guvf oheqra hcba uvz; 9:26 Fheryl V unir frra lrfgreqnl gur oybbq
bs Anobgu, naq gur oybbq bs uvf fbaf, fnvgu gur YBEQ; naq V jvyy
erdhvgr gurr va guvf cyng, fnvgu gur YBEQ. Abj gurersber gnxr naq pnfg
uvz vagb gur cyng bs tebhaq, nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ.

9:27 Ohg jura Nunmvnu gur xvat bs Whqnu fnj guvf, ur syrq ol gur jnl
bs gur tneqra ubhfr. Naq Wruh sbyybjrq nsgre uvz, naq fnvq, Fzvgr uvz
nyfb va gur punevbg. Naq gurl qvq fb ng gur tbvat hc gb The, juvpu vf
ol Voyrnz.

Naq ur syrq gb Zrtvqqb, naq qvrq gurer.

9:28 Naq uvf freinagf pneevrq uvz va n punevbg gb Wrehfnyrz, naq
ohevrq uvz va uvf frchypuer jvgu uvf snguref va gur pvgl bs Qnivq.

9:29 Naq va gur ryriragu lrne bs Wbenz gur fba bs Nuno ortna Nunmvnu
gb ervta bire Whqnu.

9:30 Naq jura Wruh jnf pbzr gb Wrmerry, Wrmrory urneq bs vg; naq fur
cnvagrq ure snpr, naq gverq ure urnq, naq ybbxrq bhg ng n jvaqbj.

9:31 Naq nf Wruh ragrerq va ng gur tngr, fur fnvq, Unq Mvzev crnpr,
jub fyrj uvf znfgre?  9:32 Naq ur yvsgrq hc uvf snpr gb gur jvaqbj,
naq fnvq, Jub vf ba zl fvqr?  jub? Naq gurer ybbxrq bhg gb uvz gjb be
guerr rhahpuf.

9:33 Naq ur fnvq, Guebj ure qbja. Fb gurl guerj ure qbja: naq fbzr bs
ure oybbq jnf fcevaxyrq ba gur jnyy, naq ba gur ubefrf: naq ur gebqr
ure haqre sbbg.

9:34 Naq jura ur jnf pbzr va, ur qvq rng naq qevax, naq fnvq, Tb, frr
abj guvf phefrq jbzna, naq ohel ure: sbe fur vf n xvat'f qnhtugre.

9:35 Naq gurl jrag gb ohel ure: ohg gurl sbhaq ab zber bs ure guna gur
fxhyy, naq gur srrg, naq gur cnyzf bs ure unaqf.

9:36 Jurersber gurl pnzr ntnva, naq gbyq uvz. Naq ur fnvq, Guvf vf gur
jbeq bs gur YBEQ, juvpu ur fcnxr ol uvf freinag Ryvwnu gur Gvfuovgr,
fnlvat, Va gur cbegvba bs Wrmerry funyy qbtf rng gur syrfu bs Wrmrory:
9:37 Naq gur pnepnfr bs Wrmrory funyy or nf qhat hcba gur snpr bs gur
svryq va gur cbegvba bs Wrmerry; fb gung gurl funyy abg fnl, Guvf vf
Wrmrory.

10:1 Naq Nuno unq friragl fbaf va Fnznevn. Naq Wruh jebgr yrggref, naq
frag gb Fnznevn, hagb gur ehyref bs Wrmerry, gb gur ryqref, naq gb
gurz gung oebhtug hc Nuno'f puvyqera, fnlvat, 10:2 Abj nf fbba nf guvf
yrggre pbzrgu gb lbh, frrvat lbhe znfgre'f fbaf ner jvgu lbh, naq
gurer ner jvgu lbh punevbgf naq ubefrf, n sraprq pvgl nyfb, naq
nezbhe; 10:3 Ybbx rira bhg gur orfg naq zrrgrfg bs lbhe znfgre'f fbaf,
naq frg uvz ba uvf sngure'f guebar, naq svtug sbe lbhe znfgre'f ubhfr.

10:4 Ohg gurl jrer rkprrqvatyl nsenvq, naq fnvq, Orubyq, gjb xvatf
fgbbq abg orsber uvz: ubj gura funyy jr fgnaq?  10:5 Naq ur gung jnf
bire gur ubhfr, naq ur gung jnf bire gur pvgl, gur ryqref nyfb, naq
gur oevatref hc bs gur puvyqera, frag gb Wruh, fnlvat, Jr ner gul
freinagf, naq jvyy qb nyy gung gubh funyg ovq hf; jr jvyy abg znxr nal
xvat: qb gubh gung juvpu vf tbbq va guvar rlrf.

10:6 Gura ur jebgr n yrggre gur frpbaq gvzr gb gurz, fnlvat, Vs lr or
zvar, naq vs lr jvyy urnexra hagb zl ibvpr, gnxr lr gur urnqf bs gur
zra lbhe znfgre'f fbaf, naq pbzr gb zr gb Wrmerry ol gb zbeebj guvf
gvzr. Abj gur xvat'f fbaf, orvat friragl crefbaf, jrer jvgu gur terng
zra bs gur pvgl, juvpu oebhtug gurz hc.

10:7 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur yrggre pnzr gb gurz, gung gurl gbbx
gur xvat'f fbaf, naq fyrj friragl crefbaf, naq chg gurve urnqf va
onfxrgf, naq frag uvz gurz gb Wrmerry.

10:8 Naq gurer pnzr n zrffratre, naq gbyq uvz, fnlvat, Gurl unir
oebhtug gur urnqf bs gur xvat'f fbaf. Naq ur fnvq, Ynl lr gurz va gjb
urncf ng gur ragrevat va bs gur tngr hagvy gur zbeavat.

10:9 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gur zbeavat, gung ur jrag bhg, naq fgbbq,
naq fnvq gb nyy gur crbcyr, Lr or evtugrbhf: orubyq, V pbafcverq
ntnvafg zl znfgre, naq fyrj uvz: ohg jub fyrj nyy gurfr?  10:10 Xabj
abj gung gurer funyy snyy hagb gur rnegu abguvat bs gur jbeq bs gur
YBEQ, juvpu gur YBEQ fcnxr pbapreavat gur ubhfr bs Nuno: sbe gur YBEQ
ungu qbar gung juvpu ur fcnxr ol uvf freinag Ryvwnu.

10:11 Fb Wruh fyrj nyy gung erznvarq bs gur ubhfr bs Nuno va Wrmerry,
naq nyy uvf terng zra, naq uvf xvafsbyxf, naq uvf cevrfgf, hagvy ur
yrsg uvz abar erznvavat.

10:12 Naq ur nebfr naq qrcnegrq, naq pnzr gb Fnznevn. Naq nf ur jnf ng
gur furnevat ubhfr va gur jnl, 10:13 Wruh zrg jvgu gur oerguera bs
Nunmvnu xvat bs Whqnu, naq fnvq, Jub ner lr? Naq gurl nafjrerq, Jr ner
gur oerguera bs Nunmvnu; naq jr tb qbja gb fnyhgr gur puvyqera bs gur
xvat naq gur puvyqera bs gur dhrra.

10:14 Naq ur fnvq, Gnxr gurz nyvir. Naq gurl gbbx gurz nyvir, naq fyrj
gurz ng gur cvg bs gur furnevat ubhfr, rira gjb naq sbegl zra; arvgure
yrsg ur nal bs gurz.

10:15 Naq jura ur jnf qrcnegrq gurapr, ur yvtugrq ba Wrubanqno gur fba
bs Erpuno pbzvat gb zrrg uvz: naq ur fnyhgrq uvz, naq fnvq gb uvz, Vf
guvar urneg evtug, nf zl urneg vf jvgu gul urneg? Naq Wrubanqno
nafjrerq, Vg vf. Vs vg or, tvir zr guvar unaq. Naq ur tnir uvz uvf
unaq; naq ur gbbx uvz hc gb uvz vagb gur punevbg.

10:16 Naq ur fnvq, Pbzr jvgu zr, naq frr zl mrny sbe gur YBEQ. Fb gurl
znqr uvz evqr va uvf punevbg.

10:17 Naq jura ur pnzr gb Fnznevn, ur fyrj nyy gung erznvarq hagb Nuno
va Fnznevn, gvyy ur unq qrfgeblrq uvz, nppbeqvat gb gur fnlvat bs gur
YBEQ, juvpu ur fcnxr gb Ryvwnu.

10:18 Naq Wruh tngurerq nyy gur crbcyr gbtrgure, naq fnvq hagb gurz,
Nuno freirq Onny n yvggyr; ohg Wruh funyy freir uvz zhpu.

10:19 Abj gurersber pnyy hagb zr nyy gur cebcurgf bs Onny, nyy uvf
freinagf, naq nyy uvf cevrfgf; yrg abar or jnagvat: sbe V unir n terng
fnpevsvpr gb qb gb Onny; jubfbrire funyy or jnagvat, ur funyy abg
yvir. Ohg Wruh qvq vg va fhogvygl, gb gur vagrag gung ur zvtug qrfgebl
gur jbefuvccref bs Onny.

10:20 Naq Wruh fnvq, Cebpynvz n fbyrza nffrzoyl sbe Onny. Naq gurl
cebpynvzrq vg.

10:21 Naq Wruh frag guebhtu nyy Vfenry: naq nyy gur jbefuvccref bs
Onny pnzr, fb gung gurer jnf abg n zna yrsg gung pnzr abg. Naq gurl
pnzr vagb gur ubhfr bs Onny; naq gur ubhfr bs Onny jnf shyy sebz bar
raq gb nabgure.

10:22 Naq ur fnvq hagb uvz gung jnf bire gur irfgel, Oevat sbegu
irfgzragf sbe nyy gur jbefuvccref bs Onny. Naq ur oebhtug gurz sbegu
irfgzragf.

10:23 Naq Wruh jrag, naq Wrubanqno gur fba bs Erpuno, vagb gur ubhfr
bs Onny, naq fnvq hagb gur jbefuvccref bs Onny, Frnepu, naq ybbx gung
gurer or urer jvgu lbh abar bs gur freinagf bs gur YBEQ, ohg gur
jbefuvccref bs Onny bayl.

10:24 Naq jura gurl jrag va gb bssre fnpevsvprf naq oheag bssrevatf,
Wruh nccbvagrq sbhefpber zra jvgubhg, naq fnvq, Vs nal bs gur zra jubz
V unir oebhtug vagb lbhe unaqf rfpncr, ur gung yrggrgu uvz tb, uvf
yvsr funyy or sbe gur yvsr bs uvz.

10:25 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf fbba nf ur unq znqr na raq bs bssrevat
gur oheag bssrevat, gung Wruh fnvq gb gur thneq naq gb gur pncgnvaf,
Tb va, naq fynl gurz; yrg abar pbzr sbegu. Naq gurl fzbgr gurz jvgu
gur rqtr bs gur fjbeq; naq gur thneq naq gur pncgnvaf pnfg gurz bhg,
naq jrag gb gur pvgl bs gur ubhfr bs Onny.

10:26 Naq gurl oebhtug sbegu gur vzntrf bhg bs gur ubhfr bs Onny, naq
ohearq gurz.

10:27 Naq gurl oenxr qbja gur vzntr bs Onny, naq oenxr qbja gur ubhfr
bs Onny, naq znqr vg n qenhtug ubhfr hagb guvf qnl.

10:28 Guhf Wruh qrfgeblrq Onny bhg bs Vfenry.

10:29 Ubjorvg sebz gur fvaf bs Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong, jub znqr
Vfenry gb fva, Wruh qrcnegrq abg sebz nsgre gurz, gb jvg, gur tbyqra
pnyirf gung jrer va Orgury, naq gung jrer va Qna.

10:30 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Wruh, Orpnhfr gubh unfg qbar jryy va
rkrphgvat gung juvpu vf evtug va zvar rlrf, naq unfg qbar hagb gur
ubhfr bs Nuno nppbeqvat gb nyy gung jnf va zvar urneg, gul puvyqera bs
gur sbhegu trarengvba funyy fvg ba gur guebar bs Vfenry.

10:31 Ohg Wruh gbbx ab urrq gb jnyx va gur ynj bs gur YBEQ Tbq bs
Vfenry jvgu nyy uvf urneg: sbe ur qrcnegrq abg sebz gur fvaf bs
Wrebobnz, juvpu znqr Vfenry gb fva.

10:32 Va gubfr qnlf gur YBEQ ortna gb phg Vfenry fubeg: naq Unmnry
fzbgr gurz va nyy gur pbnfgf bs Vfenry; 10:33 Sebz Wbeqna rnfgjneq,
nyy gur ynaq bs Tvyrnq, gur Tnqvgrf, naq gur Erhoravgrf, naq gur
Znanffvgrf, sebz Nebre, juvpu vf ol gur evire Neaba, rira Tvyrnq naq
Onfuna.

10:34 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Wruh, naq nyy gung ur qvq, naq nyy
uvf zvtug, ner gurl abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur
xvatf bs Vfenry?  10:35 Naq Wruh fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref: naq gurl
ohevrq uvz va Fnznevn. Naq Wrubnunm uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

10:36 Naq gur gvzr gung Wruh ervtarq bire Vfenry va Fnznevn jnf gjragl
naq rvtug lrnef.

11:1 Naq jura Ngunyvnu gur zbgure bs Nunmvnu fnj gung ure fba jnf
qrnq, fur nebfr naq qrfgeblrq nyy gur frrq eblny.

11:2 Ohg Wrubfuron, gur qnhtugre bs xvat Wbenz, fvfgre bs Nunmvnu,
gbbx Wbnfu gur fba bs Nunmvnu, naq fgbyr uvz sebz nzbat gur xvat'f
fbaf juvpu jrer fynva; naq gurl uvq uvz, rira uvz naq uvf ahefr, va
gur orqpunzore sebz Ngunyvnu, fb gung ur jnf abg fynva.

11:3 Naq ur jnf jvgu ure uvq va gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ fvk lrnef. Naq
Ngunyvnu qvq ervta bire gur ynaq.

11:4 Naq gur friragu lrne Wrubvnqn frag naq srgpurq gur ehyref bire
uhaqerqf, jvgu gur pncgnvaf naq gur thneq, naq oebhtug gurz gb uvz
vagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq znqr n pbiranag jvgu gurz, naq gbbx na
bngu bs gurz va gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq furjrq gurz gur xvat'f fba.

11:5 Naq ur pbzznaqrq gurz, fnlvat, Guvf vf gur guvat gung lr funyy
qb; N guveq cneg bs lbh gung ragre va ba gur fnoongu funyy rira or
xrrcref bs gur jngpu bs gur xvat'f ubhfr; 11:6 Naq n guveq cneg funyy
or ng gur tngr bs Fhe; naq n guveq cneg ng gur tngr oruvaq gur thneq:
fb funyy lr xrrc gur jngpu bs gur ubhfr, gung vg or abg oebxra qbja.

11:7 Naq gjb cnegf bs nyy lbh gung tb sbegu ba gur fnoongu, rira gurl
funyy xrrc gur jngpu bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ nobhg gur xvat.

11:8 Naq lr funyy pbzcnff gur xvat ebhaq nobhg, rirel zna jvgu uvf
jrncbaf va uvf unaq: naq ur gung pbzrgu jvguva gur enatrf, yrg uvz or
fynva: naq or lr jvgu gur xvat nf ur tbrgu bhg naq nf ur pbzrgu va.

11:9 Naq gur pncgnvaf bire gur uhaqerqf qvq nppbeqvat gb nyy guvatf
gung Wrubvnqn gur cevrfg pbzznaqrq: naq gurl gbbx rirel zna uvf zra
gung jrer gb pbzr va ba gur fnoongu, jvgu gurz gung fubhyq tb bhg ba
gur fnoongu, naq pnzr gb Wrubvnqn gur cevrfg.

11:10 Naq gb gur pncgnvaf bire uhaqerqf qvq gur cevrfg tvir xvat
Qnivq'f fcrnef naq fuvryqf, gung jrer va gur grzcyr bs gur YBEQ.

11:11 Naq gur thneq fgbbq, rirel zna jvgu uvf jrncbaf va uvf unaq,
ebhaq nobhg gur xvat, sebz gur evtug pbeare bs gur grzcyr gb gur yrsg
pbeare bs gur grzcyr, nybat ol gur nygne naq gur grzcyr.

11:12 Naq ur oebhtug sbegu gur xvat'f fba, naq chg gur pebja hcba uvz,
naq tnir uvz gur grfgvzbal; naq gurl znqr uvz xvat, naq nabvagrq uvz;
naq gurl pynccrq gurve unaqf, naq fnvq, Tbq fnir gur xvat.

11:13 Naq jura Ngunyvnu urneq gur abvfr bs gur thneq naq bs gur
crbcyr, fur pnzr gb gur crbcyr vagb gur grzcyr bs gur YBEQ.

11:14 Naq jura fur ybbxrq, orubyq, gur xvat fgbbq ol n cvyyne, nf gur
znaare jnf, naq gur cevaprf naq gur gehzcrgref ol gur xvat, naq nyy
gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq erwbvprq, naq oyrj jvgu gehzcrgf: naq Ngunyvnu
erag ure pybgurf, naq pevrq, Gernfba, Gernfba.

11:15 Ohg Wrubvnqn gur cevrfg pbzznaqrq gur pncgnvaf bs gur uhaqerqf,
gur bssvpref bs gur ubfg, naq fnvq hagb gurz, Unir ure sbegu jvgubhg
gur enatrf: naq uvz gung sbyybjrgu ure xvyy jvgu gur fjbeq. Sbe gur
cevrfg unq fnvq, Yrg ure abg or fynva va gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

11:16 Naq gurl ynvq unaqf ba ure; naq fur jrag ol gur jnl ol gur juvpu
gur ubefrf pnzr vagb gur xvat'f ubhfr: naq gurer jnf fur fynva.

11:17 Naq Wrubvnqn znqr n pbiranag orgjrra gur YBEQ naq gur xvat naq
gur crbcyr, gung gurl fubhyq or gur YBEQ'f crbcyr; orgjrra gur xvat
nyfb naq gur crbcyr.

11:18 Naq nyy gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq jrag vagb gur ubhfr bs Onny, naq
oenxr vg qbja; uvf nygnef naq uvf vzntrf oenxr gurl va cvrprf
gubebhtuyl, naq fyrj Znggna gur cevrfg bs Onny orsber gur nygnef. Naq
gur cevrfg nccbvagrq bssvpref bire gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

11:19 Naq ur gbbx gur ehyref bire uhaqerqf, naq gur pncgnvaf, naq gur
thneq, naq nyy gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq; naq gurl oebhtug qbja gur xvat
sebz gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq pnzr ol gur jnl bs gur tngr bs gur
thneq gb gur xvat'f ubhfr. Naq ur fng ba gur guebar bs gur xvatf.

11:20 Naq nyy gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq erwbvprq, naq gur pvgl jnf va
dhvrg: naq gurl fyrj Ngunyvnu jvgu gur fjbeq orfvqr gur xvat'f ubhfr.

11:21 Frira lrnef byq jnf Wrubnfu jura ur ortna gb ervta.

12:1 Va gur friragu lrne bs Wruh Wrubnfu ortna gb ervta; naq sbegl
lrnef ervtarq ur va Wrehfnyrz. Naq uvf zbgure'f anzr jnf Mvovnu bs
Orrefuron.

12:2 Naq Wrubnfu qvq gung juvpu jnf evtug va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ nyy
uvf qnlf jurerva Wrubvnqn gur cevrfg vafgehpgrq uvz.

12:3 Ohg gur uvtu cynprf jrer abg gnxra njnl: gur crbcyr fgvyy
fnpevsvprq naq oheag vaprafr va gur uvtu cynprf.

12:4 Naq Wrubnfu fnvq gb gur cevrfgf, Nyy gur zbarl bs gur qrqvpngrq
guvatf gung vf oebhtug vagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, rira gur zbarl bs
rirel bar gung cnffrgu gur nppbhag, gur zbarl gung rirel zna vf frg
ng, naq nyy gur zbarl gung pbzrgu vagb nal zna'f urneg gb oevat vagb
gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, 12:5 Yrg gur cevrfgf gnxr vg gb gurz, rirel zna
bs uvf npdhnvagnapr: naq yrg gurz ercnve gur oernpurf bs gur ubhfr,
jurerfbrire nal oernpu funyy or sbhaq.

12:6 Ohg vg jnf fb, gung va gur guerr naq gjragvrgu lrne bs xvat
Wrubnfu gur cevrfgf unq abg ercnverq gur oernpurf bs gur ubhfr.

12:7 Gura xvat Wrubnfu pnyyrq sbe Wrubvnqn gur cevrfg, naq gur bgure
cevrfgf, naq fnvq hagb gurz, Jul ercnve lr abg gur oernpurf bs gur
ubhfr? abj gurersber erprvir ab zber zbarl bs lbhe npdhnvagnapr, ohg
qryvire vg sbe gur oernpurf bs gur ubhfr.

12:8 Naq gur cevrfgf pbafragrq gb erprvir ab zber zbarl bs gur crbcyr,
arvgure gb ercnve gur oernpurf bs gur ubhfr.

12:9 Ohg Wrubvnqn gur cevrfg gbbx n purfg, naq oberq n ubyr va gur yvq
bs vg, naq frg vg orfvqr gur nygne, ba gur evtug fvqr nf bar pbzrgu
vagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ: naq gur cevrfgf gung xrcg gur qbbe chg
gurerva nyy gur zbarl gung jnf oebhtug vagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

12:10 Naq vg jnf fb, jura gurl fnj gung gurer jnf zhpu zbarl va gur
purfg, gung gur xvat'f fpevor naq gur uvtu cevrfg pnzr hc, naq gurl
chg hc va ontf, naq gbyq gur zbarl gung jnf sbhaq va gur ubhfr bs gur
YBEQ.

12:11 Naq gurl tnir gur zbarl, orvat gbyq, vagb gur unaqf bs gurz gung
qvq gur jbex, gung unq gur birefvtug bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ: naq
gurl ynvq vg bhg gb gur pnecragref naq ohvyqref, gung jebhtug hcba gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, 12:12 Naq gb znfbaf, naq urjref bs fgbar, naq gb
ohl gvzore naq urjrq fgbar gb ercnve gur oernpurf bs gur ubhfr bs gur
YBEQ, naq sbe nyy gung jnf ynvq bhg sbe gur ubhfr gb ercnve vg.

12:13 Ubjorvg gurer jrer abg znqr sbe gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ objyf bs
fvyire, fahssref, onfbaf, gehzcrgf, nal irffryf bs tbyq, be irffryf bs
fvyire, bs gur zbarl gung jnf oebhtug vagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ:
12:14 Ohg gurl tnir gung gb gur jbexzra, naq ercnverq gurerjvgu gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

12:15 Zberbire gurl erpxbarq abg jvgu gur zra, vagb jubfr unaq gurl
qryvirerq gur zbarl gb or orfgbjrq ba jbexzra: sbe gurl qrnyg
snvgushyyl.

12:16 Gur gerfcnff zbarl naq fva zbarl jnf abg oebhtug vagb gur ubhfr
bs gur YBEQ: vg jnf gur cevrfgf'.

12:17 Gura Unmnry xvat bs Flevn jrag hc, naq sbhtug ntnvafg Tngu, naq
gbbx vg: naq Unmnry frg uvf snpr gb tb hc gb Wrehfnyrz.

12:18 Naq Wrubnfu xvat bs Whqnu gbbx nyy gur unyybjrq guvatf gung
Wrubfuncung, naq Wrubenz, naq Nunmvnu, uvf snguref, xvatf bs Whqnu,
unq qrqvpngrq, naq uvf bja unyybjrq guvatf, naq nyy gur tbyq gung jnf
sbhaq va gur gernfherf bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq va gur xvat'f
ubhfr, naq frag vg gb Unmnry xvat bs Flevn: naq ur jrag njnl sebz
Wrehfnyrz.

12:19 Naq gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Wbnfu, naq nyy gung ur qvq, ner gurl
abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Whqnu?
12:20 Naq uvf freinagf nebfr, naq znqr n pbafcvenpl, naq fyrj Wbnfu va
gur ubhfr bs Zvyyb, juvpu tbrgu qbja gb Fvyyn.

12:21 Sbe Wbmnpune gur fba bs Fuvzrngu, naq Wrubmnonq gur fba bs
Fubzre, uvf freinagf, fzbgr uvz, naq ur qvrq; naq gurl ohevrq uvz jvgu
uvf snguref va gur pvgl bs Qnivq: naq Nznmvnu uvf fba ervtarq va uvf
fgrnq.

13:1 Va gur guerr naq gjragvrgu lrne bs Wbnfu gur fba bs Nunmvnu xvat
bs Whqnu Wrubnunm gur fba bs Wruh ortna gb ervta bire Vfenry va
Fnznevn, naq ervtarq friragrra lrnef.

13:2 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, naq
sbyybjrq gur fvaf bs Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong, juvpu znqr Vfenry gb
fva; ur qrcnegrq abg gurersebz.

13:3 Naq gur natre bs gur YBEQ jnf xvaqyrq ntnvafg Vfenry, naq ur
qryvirerq gurz vagb gur unaq bs Unmnry xvat bs Flevn, naq vagb gur
unaq bs Oraunqnq gur fba bs Unmnry, nyy gurve qnlf.

13:4 Naq Wrubnunm orfbhtug gur YBEQ, naq gur YBEQ urnexrarq hagb uvz:
sbe ur fnj gur bccerffvba bs Vfenry, orpnhfr gur xvat bs Flevn
bccerffrq gurz.

13:5 (Naq gur YBEQ tnir Vfenry n fnivbhe, fb gung gurl jrag bhg sebz
haqre gur unaq bs gur Flevnaf: naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qjryg va
gurve gragf, nf orsbergvzr.

13:6 Arireguryrff gurl qrcnegrq abg sebz gur fvaf bs gur ubhfr bs
Wrebobnz, jub znqr Vfenry fva, ohg jnyxrq gurerva: naq gurer erznvarq
gur tebir nyfb va Fnznevn.)  13:7 Arvgure qvq ur yrnir bs gur crbcyr
gb Wrubnunm ohg svsgl ubefrzra, naq gra punevbgf, naq gra gubhfnaq
sbbgzra; sbe gur xvat bs Flevn unq qrfgeblrq gurz, naq unq znqr gurz
yvxr gur qhfg ol guerfuvat.

13:8 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Wrubnunm, naq nyy gung ur qvq, naq
uvf zvtug, ner gurl abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur
xvatf bs Vfenry?  13:9 Naq Wrubnunm fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref; naq gurl
ohevrq uvz va Fnznevn: naq Wbnfu uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

13:10 Va gur guvegl naq friragu lrne bs Wbnfu xvat bs Whqnu ortna
Wrubnfu gur fba bs Wrubnunm gb ervta bire Vfenry va Fnznevn, naq
ervtarq fvkgrra lrnef.

13:11 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ; ur
qrcnegrq abg sebz nyy gur fvaf bs Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong, jub znqr
Vfenry fva: ohg ur jnyxrq gurerva.

13:12 Naq gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Wbnfu, naq nyy gung ur qvq, naq uvf
zvtug jurerjvgu ur sbhtug ntnvafg Nznmvnu xvat bs Whqnu, ner gurl abg
jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Vfenry?  13:13
Naq Wbnfu fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref; naq Wrebobnz fng hcba uvf guebar:
naq Wbnfu jnf ohevrq va Fnznevn jvgu gur xvatf bs Vfenry.

13:14 Abj Ryvfun jnf snyyra fvpx bs uvf fvpxarff jurerbs ur qvrq. Naq
Wbnfu gur xvat bs Vfenry pnzr qbja hagb uvz, naq jrcg bire uvf snpr,
naq fnvq, B zl sngure, zl sngure, gur punevbg bs Vfenry, naq gur
ubefrzra gurerbs.

13:15 Naq Ryvfun fnvq hagb uvz, Gnxr obj naq neebjf. Naq ur gbbx hagb
uvz obj naq neebjf.

13:16 Naq ur fnvq gb gur xvat bs Vfenry, Chg guvar unaq hcba gur obj.
Naq ur chg uvf unaq hcba vg: naq Ryvfun chg uvf unaqf hcba gur xvat'f
unaqf.

13:17 Naq ur fnvq, Bcra gur jvaqbj rnfgjneq. Naq ur bcrarq vg. Gura
Ryvfun fnvq, Fubbg. Naq ur fubg. Naq ur fnvq, Gur neebj bs gur YBEQ'f
qryvirenapr, naq gur neebj bs qryvirenapr sebz Flevn: sbe gubh funyg
fzvgr gur Flevnaf va Ncurx, gvyy gubh unir pbafhzrq gurz.

13:18 Naq ur fnvq, Gnxr gur neebjf. Naq ur gbbx gurz. Naq ur fnvq hagb
gur xvat bs Vfenry, Fzvgr hcba gur tebhaq. Naq ur fzbgr guevpr, naq
fgnlrq.

13:19 Naq gur zna bs Tbq jnf jebgu jvgu uvz, naq fnvq, Gubh fubhyqrfg
unir fzvggra svir be fvk gvzrf; gura unqfg gubh fzvggra Flevn gvyy
gubh unqfg pbafhzrq vg: jurernf abj gubh funyg fzvgr Flevn ohg guevpr.

13:20 Naq Ryvfun qvrq, naq gurl ohevrq uvz. Naq gur onaqf bs gur
Zbnovgrf vainqrq gur ynaq ng gur pbzvat va bs gur lrne.

13:21 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf gurl jrer ohelvat n zna, gung, orubyq,
gurl fcvrq n onaq bs zra; naq gurl pnfg gur zna vagb gur frchypuer bs
Ryvfun: naq jura gur zna jnf yrg qbja, naq gbhpurq gur obarf bs
Ryvfun, ur erivirq, naq fgbbq hc ba uvf srrg.

13:22 Ohg Unmnry xvat bs Flevn bccerffrq Vfenry nyy gur qnlf bs
Wrubnunm.

13:23 Naq gur YBEQ jnf tenpvbhf hagb gurz, naq unq pbzcnffvba ba gurz,
naq unq erfcrpg hagb gurz, orpnhfr bs uvf pbiranag jvgu Noenunz,
Vfnnp, naq Wnpbo, naq jbhyq abg qrfgebl gurz, arvgure pnfg ur gurz
sebz uvf cerfrapr nf lrg.

13:24 Fb Unmnry xvat bs Flevn qvrq; naq Oraunqnq uvf fba ervtarq va
uvf fgrnq.

13:25 Naq Wrubnfu gur fba bs Wrubnunm gbbx ntnva bhg bs gur unaq bs
Oraunqnq gur fba bs Unmnry gur pvgvrf, juvpu ur unq gnxra bhg bs gur
unaq bs Wrubnunm uvf sngure ol jne. Guerr gvzrf qvq Wbnfu orng uvz,
naq erpbirerq gur pvgvrf bs Vfenry.

14:1 Va gur frpbaq lrne bs Wbnfu fba bs Wrubnunm xvat bs Vfenry
ervtarq Nznmvnu gur fba bs Wbnfu xvat bs Whqnu.

14:2 Ur jnf gjragl naq svir lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq
ervtarq gjragl naq avar lrnef va Wrehfnyrz. Naq uvf zbgure'f anzr jnf
Wrubnqqna bs Wrehfnyrz.

14:3 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf evtug va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, lrg abg
yvxr Qnivq uvf sngure: ur qvq nppbeqvat gb nyy guvatf nf Wbnfu uvf
sngure qvq.

14:4 Ubjorvg gur uvtu cynprf jrer abg gnxra njnl: nf lrg gur crbcyr
qvq fnpevsvpr naq oheag vaprafr ba gur uvtu cynprf.

14:5 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf fbba nf gur xvatqbz jnf pbasvezrq va uvf
unaq, gung ur fyrj uvf freinagf juvpu unq fynva gur xvat uvf sngure.

14:6 Ohg gur puvyqera bs gur zheqreref ur fyrj abg: nppbeqvat hagb
gung juvpu vf jevggra va gur obbx bs gur ynj bs Zbfrf, jurerva gur
YBEQ pbzznaqrq, fnlvat, Gur snguref funyy abg or chg gb qrngu sbe gur
puvyqera, abe gur puvyqera or chg gb qrngu sbe gur snguref; ohg rirel
zna funyy or chg gb qrngu sbe uvf bja fva.

14:7 Ur fyrj bs Rqbz va gur inyyrl bs fnyg gra gubhfnaq, naq gbbx
Frynu ol jne, naq pnyyrq gur anzr bs vg Wbxgurry hagb guvf qnl.

14:8 Gura Nznmvnu frag zrffratref gb Wrubnfu, gur fba bs Wrubnunm fba
bs Wruh, xvat bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Pbzr, yrg hf ybbx bar nabgure va gur
snpr.

14:9 Naq Wrubnfu gur xvat bs Vfenry frag gb Nznmvnu xvat bs Whqnu,
fnlvat, Gur guvfgyr gung jnf va Yronaba frag gb gur prqne gung jnf va
Yronaba, fnlvat, Tvir gul qnhtugre gb zl fba gb jvsr: naq gurer cnffrq
ol n jvyq ornfg gung jnf va Yronaba, naq gebqr qbja gur guvfgyr.

14:10 Gubh unfg vaqrrq fzvggra Rqbz, naq guvar urneg ungu yvsgrq gurr
hc: tybel bs guvf, naq gneel ng ubzr: sbe jul fubhyqrfg gubh zrqqyr gb
gul uheg, gung gubh fubhyqrfg snyy, rira gubh, naq Whqnu jvgu gurr?
14:11 Ohg Nznmvnu jbhyq abg urne. Gurersber Wrubnfu xvat bs Vfenry
jrag hc; naq ur naq Nznmvnu xvat bs Whqnu ybbxrq bar nabgure va gur
snpr ng Orgufurzrfu, juvpu orybatrgu gb Whqnu.

14:12 Naq Whqnu jnf chg gb gur jbefr orsber Vfenry; naq gurl syrq
rirel zna gb gurve gragf.

14:13 Naq Wrubnfu xvat bs Vfenry gbbx Nznmvnu xvat bs Whqnu, gur fba
bs Wrubnfu gur fba bs Nunmvnu, ng Orgufurzrfu, naq pnzr gb Wrehfnyrz,
naq oenxr qbja gur jnyy bs Wrehfnyrz sebz gur tngr bs Rcuenvz hagb gur
pbeare tngr, sbhe uhaqerq phovgf.

14:14 Naq ur gbbx nyy gur tbyq naq fvyire, naq nyy gur irffryf gung
jrer sbhaq va gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq va gur gernfherf bs gur
xvat'f ubhfr, naq ubfgntrf, naq erghearq gb Fnznevn.

14:15 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Wrubnfu juvpu ur qvq, naq uvf zvtug,
naq ubj ur sbhtug jvgu Nznmvnu xvat bs Whqnu, ner gurl abg jevggra va
gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Vfenry?  14:16 Naq Wrubnfu
fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq jnf ohevrq va Fnznevn jvgu gur xvatf bs
Vfenry; naq Wrebobnz uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

14:17 Naq Nznmvnu gur fba bs Wbnfu xvat bs Whqnu yvirq nsgre gur qrngu
bs Wrubnfu fba bs Wrubnunm xvat bs Vfenry svsgrra lrnef.

14:18 Naq gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Nznmvnu, ner gurl abg jevggra va gur
obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Whqnu?  14:19 Abj gurl znqr n
pbafcvenpl ntnvafg uvz va Wrehfnyrz: naq ur syrq gb Ynpuvfu; ohg gurl
frag nsgre uvz gb Ynpuvfu, naq fyrj uvz gurer.

14:20 Naq gurl oebhtug uvz ba ubefrf: naq ur jnf ohevrq ng Wrehfnyrz
jvgu uvf snguref va gur pvgl bs Qnivq.

14:21 Naq nyy gur crbcyr bs Whqnu gbbx Nmnevnu, juvpu jnf fvkgrra
lrnef byq, naq znqr uvz xvat vafgrnq bs uvf sngure Nznmvnu.

14:22 Ur ohvyg Ryngu, naq erfgberq vg gb Whqnu, nsgre gung gur xvat
fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref.

14:23 Va gur svsgrragu lrne bs Nznmvnu gur fba bs Wbnfu xvat bs Whqnu
Wrebobnz gur fba bs Wbnfu xvat bs Vfenry ortna gb ervta va Fnznevn,
naq ervtarq sbegl naq bar lrnef.

14:24 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ: ur
qrcnegrq abg sebz nyy gur fvaf bs Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong, jub znqr
Vfenry gb fva.

14:25 Ur erfgberq gur pbnfg bs Vfenry sebz gur ragrevat bs Unzngu hagb
gur frn bs gur cynva, nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry,
juvpu ur fcnxr ol gur unaq bs uvf freinag Wbanu, gur fba bs Nzvggnv,
gur cebcurg, juvpu jnf bs Tnguurcure.

14:26 Sbe gur YBEQ fnj gur nssyvpgvba bs Vfenry, gung vg jnf irel
ovggre: sbe gurer jnf abg nal fuhg hc, abe nal yrsg, abe nal urycre
sbe Vfenry.

14:27 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq abg gung ur jbhyq oybg bhg gur anzr bs Vfenry
sebz haqre urnira: ohg ur fnirq gurz ol gur unaq bs Wrebobnz gur fba
bs Wbnfu.

14:28 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Wrebobnz, naq nyy gung ur qvq, naq
uvf zvtug, ubj ur jneerq, naq ubj ur erpbirerq Qnznfphf, naq Unzngu,
juvpu orybatrq gb Whqnu, sbe Vfenry, ner gurl abg jevggra va gur obbx
bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Vfenry?  14:29 Naq Wrebobnz fyrcg
jvgu uvf snguref, rira jvgu gur xvatf bs Vfenry; naq Mnpunevnu uvf fba
ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

15:1 Va gur gjragl naq friragu lrne bs Wrebobnz xvat bs Vfenry ortna
Nmnevnu fba bs Nznmvnu xvat bs Whqnu gb ervta.

15:2 Fvkgrra lrnef byq jnf ur jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq ur ervtarq
gjb naq svsgl lrnef va Wrehfnyrz. Naq uvf zbgure'f anzr jnf Wrpubyvnu
bs Wrehfnyrz.

15:3 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf evtug va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ,
nppbeqvat gb nyy gung uvf sngure Nznmvnu unq qbar; 15:4 Fnir gung gur
uvtu cynprf jrer abg erzbirq: gur crbcyr fnpevsvprq naq oheag vaprafr
fgvyy ba gur uvtu cynprf.

15:5 Naq gur YBEQ fzbgr gur xvat, fb gung ur jnf n yrcre hagb gur qnl
bs uvf qrngu, naq qjryg va n frireny ubhfr. Naq Wbgunz gur xvat'f fba
jnf bire gur ubhfr, whqtvat gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq.

15:6 Naq gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Nmnevnu, naq nyy gung ur qvq, ner
gurl abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Whqnu?
15:7 Fb Nmnevnu fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref; naq gurl ohevrq uvz jvgu uvf
snguref va gur pvgl bs Qnivq: naq Wbgunz uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

15:8 Va gur guvegl naq rvtugu lrne bs Nmnevnu xvat bs Whqnu qvq
Mnpunevnu gur fba bs Wrebobnz ervta bire Vfenry va Fnznevn fvk zbaguf.

15:9 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, nf uvf
snguref unq qbar: ur qrcnegrq abg sebz gur fvaf bs Wrebobnz gur fba bs
Arong, jub znqr Vfenry gb fva.

15:10 Naq Funyyhz gur fba bs Wnorfu pbafcverq ntnvafg uvz, naq fzbgr
uvz orsber gur crbcyr, naq fyrj uvz, naq ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

15:11 Naq gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Mnpunevnu, orubyq, gurl ner jevggra
va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Vfenry.

15:12 Guvf jnf gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ juvpu ur fcnxr hagb Wruh, fnlvat,
Gul fbaf funyy fvg ba gur guebar bs Vfenry hagb gur sbhegu trarengvba.
Naq fb vg pnzr gb cnff.

15:13 Funyyhz gur fba bs Wnorfu ortna gb ervta va gur avar naq
guvegvrgu lrne bs Hmmvnu xvat bs Whqnu; naq ur ervtarq n shyy zbagu va
Fnznevn.

15:14 Sbe Zranurz gur fba bs Tnqv jrag hc sebz Gvemnu, naq pnzr gb
Fnznevn, naq fzbgr Funyyhz gur fba bs Wnorfu va Fnznevn, naq fyrj uvz,
naq ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

15:15 Naq gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Funyyhz, naq uvf pbafcvenpl juvpu ur
znqr, orubyq, gurl ner jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur
xvatf bs Vfenry.

15:16 Gura Zranurz fzbgr Gvcufnu, naq nyy gung jrer gurerva, naq gur
pbnfgf gurerbs sebz Gvemnu: orpnhfr gurl bcrarq abg gb uvz, gurersber
ur fzbgr vg; naq nyy gur jbzra gurerva gung jrer jvgu puvyq ur evccrq
hc.

15:17 Va gur avar naq guvegvrgu lrne bs Nmnevnu xvat bs Whqnu ortna
Zranurz gur fba bs Tnqv gb ervta bire Vfenry, naq ervtarq gra lrnef va
Fnznevn.

15:18 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ: ur
qrcnegrq abg nyy uvf qnlf sebz gur fvaf bs Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong,
jub znqr Vfenry gb fva.

15:19 Naq Chy gur xvat bs Nfflevn pnzr ntnvafg gur ynaq: naq Zranurz
tnir Chy n gubhfnaq gnyragf bs fvyire, gung uvf unaq zvtug or jvgu uvz
gb pbasvez gur xvatqbz va uvf unaq.

15:20 Naq Zranurz rknpgrq gur zbarl bs Vfenry, rira bs nyy gur zvtugl
zra bs jrnygu, bs rnpu zna svsgl furxryf bs fvyire, gb tvir gb gur
xvat bs Nfflevn. Fb gur xvat bs Nfflevn ghearq onpx, naq fgnlrq abg
gurer va gur ynaq.

15:21 Naq gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Zranurz, naq nyy gung ur qvq, ner
gurl abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Vfenry?
15:22 Naq Zranurz fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref; naq Crxnuvnu uvf fba ervtarq
va uvf fgrnq.

15:23 Va gur svsgvrgu lrne bs Nmnevnu xvat bs Whqnu Crxnuvnu gur fba
bs Zranurz ortna gb ervta bire Vfenry va Fnznevn, naq ervtarq gjb
lrnef.

15:24 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ: ur
qrcnegrq abg sebz gur fvaf bs Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong, jub znqr
Vfenry gb fva.

15:25 Ohg Crxnu gur fba bs Erznyvnu, n pncgnva bs uvf, pbafcverq
ntnvafg uvz, naq fzbgr uvz va Fnznevn, va gur cnynpr bs gur xvat'f
ubhfr, jvgu Netbo naq Nevru, naq jvgu uvz svsgl zra bs gur Tvyrnqvgrf:
naq ur xvyyrq uvz, naq ervtarq va uvf ebbz.

15:26 Naq gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Crxnuvnu, naq nyy gung ur qvq,
orubyq, gurl ner jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs
Vfenry.

15:27 Va gur gjb naq svsgvrgu lrne bs Nmnevnu xvat bs Whqnu Crxnu gur
fba bs Erznyvnu ortna gb ervta bire Vfenry va Fnznevn, naq ervtarq
gjragl lrnef.

15:28 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ: ur
qrcnegrq abg sebz gur fvaf bs Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong, jub znqr
Vfenry gb fva.

15:29 Va gur qnlf bs Crxnu xvat bs Vfenry pnzr Gvtyngucvyrfre xvat bs
Nfflevn, naq gbbx Vwba, naq Noryorguznnpunu, naq Wnabnu, naq Xrqrfu,
naq Unmbe, naq Tvyrnq, naq Tnyvyrr, nyy gur ynaq bs Ancugnyv, naq
pneevrq gurz pncgvir gb Nfflevn.

15:30 Naq Ubfurn gur fba bs Rynu znqr n pbafcvenpl ntnvafg Crxnu gur
fba bs Erznyvnu, naq fzbgr uvz, naq fyrj uvz, naq ervtarq va uvf
fgrnq, va gur gjragvrgu lrne bs Wbgunz gur fba bs Hmmvnu.

15:31 Naq gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Crxnu, naq nyy gung ur qvq, orubyq,
gurl ner jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Vfenry.

15:32 Va gur frpbaq lrne bs Crxnu gur fba bs Erznyvnu xvat bs Vfenry
ortna Wbgunz gur fba bs Hmmvnu xvat bs Whqnu gb ervta.

15:33 Svir naq gjragl lrnef byq jnf ur jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq ur
ervtarq fvkgrra lrnef va Wrehfnyrz. Naq uvf zbgure'f anzr jnf Wrehfun,
gur qnhtugre bs Mnqbx.

15:34 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf evtug va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ: ur qvq
nppbeqvat gb nyy gung uvf sngure Hmmvnu unq qbar.

15:35 Ubjorvg gur uvtu cynprf jrer abg erzbirq: gur crbcyr fnpevsvprq
naq ohearq vaprafr fgvyy va gur uvtu cynprf. Ur ohvyg gur uvture tngr
bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

15:36 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Wbgunz, naq nyy gung ur qvq, ner
gurl abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Whqnu?
15:37 Va gubfr qnlf gur YBEQ ortna gb fraq ntnvafg Whqnu Ermva gur
xvat bs Flevn, naq Crxnu gur fba bs Erznyvnu.

15:38 Naq Wbgunz fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq jnf ohevrq jvgu uvf
snguref va gur pvgl bs Qnivq uvf sngure: naq Nunm uvf fba ervtarq va
uvf fgrnq.

16:1 Va gur friragrragu lrne bs Crxnu gur fba bs Erznyvnu Nunm gur fba
bs Wbgunz xvat bs Whqnu ortna gb ervta.

16:2 Gjragl lrnef byq jnf Nunm jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq ervtarq
fvkgrra lrnef va Wrehfnyrz, naq qvq abg gung juvpu jnf evtug va gur
fvtug bs gur YBEQ uvf Tbq, yvxr Qnivq uvf sngure.

16:3 Ohg ur jnyxrq va gur jnl bs gur xvatf bs Vfenry, lrn, naq znqr
uvf fba gb cnff guebhtu gur sver, nppbeqvat gb gur nobzvangvbaf bs gur
urngura, jubz gur YBEQ pnfg bhg sebz orsber gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

16:4 Naq ur fnpevsvprq naq oheag vaprafr va gur uvtu cynprf, naq ba
gur uvyyf, naq haqre rirel terra gerr.

16:5 Gura Ermva xvat bs Flevn naq Crxnu fba bs Erznyvnu xvat bs Vfenry
pnzr hc gb Wrehfnyrz gb jne: naq gurl orfvrtrq Nunm, ohg pbhyq abg
birepbzr uvz.

16:6 Ng gung gvzr Ermva xvat bs Flevn erpbirerq Ryngu gb Flevn, naq
qenir gur Wrjf sebz Ryngu: naq gur Flevnaf pnzr gb Ryngu, naq qjryg
gurer hagb guvf qnl.

16:7 Fb Nunm frag zrffratref gb Gvtyngucvyrfre xvat bs Nfflevn,
fnlvat, V nz gul freinag naq gul fba: pbzr hc, naq fnir zr bhg bs gur
unaq bs gur xvat bs Flevn, naq bhg bs gur unaq bs gur xvat bs Vfenry,
juvpu evfr hc ntnvafg zr.

16:8 Naq Nunm gbbx gur fvyire naq tbyq gung jnf sbhaq va gur ubhfr bs
gur YBEQ, naq va gur gernfherf bs gur xvat'f ubhfr, naq frag vg sbe n
cerfrag gb gur xvat bs Nfflevn.

16:9 Naq gur xvat bs Nfflevn urnexrarq hagb uvz: sbe gur xvat bs
Nfflevn jrag hc ntnvafg Qnznfphf, naq gbbx vg, naq pneevrq gur crbcyr
bs vg pncgvir gb Xve, naq fyrj Ermva.

16:10 Naq xvat Nunm jrag gb Qnznfphf gb zrrg Gvtyngucvyrfre xvat bs
Nfflevn, naq fnj na nygne gung jnf ng Qnznfphf: naq xvat Nunm frag gb
Hevwnu gur cevrfg gur snfuvba bs gur nygne, naq gur cnggrea bs vg,
nppbeqvat gb nyy gur jbexznafuvc gurerbs.

16:11 Naq Hevwnu gur cevrfg ohvyg na nygne nppbeqvat gb nyy gung xvat
Nunm unq frag sebz Qnznfphf: fb Hevwnu gur cevrfg znqr vg ntnvafg xvat
Nunm pnzr sebz Qnznfphf.

16:12 Naq jura gur xvat jnf pbzr sebz Qnznfphf, gur xvat fnj gur
nygne: naq gur xvat nccebnpurq gb gur nygne, naq bssrerq gurerba.

16:13 Naq ur oheag uvf oheag bssrevat naq uvf zrng bssrevat, naq
cbherq uvf qevax bssrevat, naq fcevaxyrq gur oybbq bs uvf crnpr
bssrevatf, hcba gur nygne.

16:14 Naq ur oebhtug nyfb gur oenfra nygne, juvpu jnf orsber gur YBEQ,
sebz gur sbersebag bs gur ubhfr, sebz orgjrra gur nygne naq gur ubhfr
bs gur YBEQ, naq chg vg ba gur abegu fvqr bs gur nygne.

16:15 Naq xvat Nunm pbzznaqrq Hevwnu gur cevrfg, fnlvat, Hcba gur
terng nygne ohea gur zbeavat oheag bssrevat, naq gur riravat zrng
bssrevat, naq gur xvat'f oheag fnpevsvpr, naq uvf zrng bssrevat, jvgu
gur oheag bssrevat bs nyy gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq, naq gurve zrng
bssrevat, naq gurve qevax bssrevatf; naq fcevaxyr hcba vg nyy gur
oybbq bs gur oheag bssrevat, naq nyy gur oybbq bs gur fnpevsvpr: naq
gur oenfra nygne funyy or sbe zr gb radhver ol.

16:16 Guhf qvq Hevwnu gur cevrfg, nppbeqvat gb nyy gung xvat Nunm
pbzznaqrq.

16:17 Naq xvat Nunm phg bss gur obeqref bs gur onfrf, naq erzbirq gur
ynire sebz bss gurz; naq gbbx qbja gur frn sebz bss gur oenfra bkra
gung jrer haqre vg, naq chg vg hcba gur cnirzrag bs fgbarf.

16:18 Naq gur pbireg sbe gur fnoongu gung gurl unq ohvyg va gur ubhfr,
naq gur xvat'f ragel jvgubhg, ghearq ur sebz gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ sbe
gur xvat bs Nfflevn.

16:19 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Nunm juvpu ur qvq, ner gurl abg
jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Whqnu?  16:20
Naq Nunm fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq jnf ohevrq jvgu uvf snguref va
gur pvgl bs Qnivq: naq Urmrxvnu uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

17:1 Va gur gjrysgu lrne bs Nunm xvat bs Whqnu ortna Ubfurn gur fba bs
Rynu gb ervta va Fnznevn bire Vfenry avar lrnef.

17:2 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, ohg abg
nf gur xvatf bs Vfenry gung jrer orsber uvz.

17:3 Ntnvafg uvz pnzr hc Funyznarfre xvat bs Nfflevn; naq Ubfurn
orpnzr uvf freinag, naq tnir uvz cerfragf.

17:4 Naq gur xvat bs Nfflevn sbhaq pbafcvenpl va Ubfurn: sbe ur unq
frag zrffratref gb Fb xvat bs Rtlcg, naq oebhtug ab cerfrag gb gur
xvat bs Nfflevn, nf ur unq qbar lrne ol lrne: gurersber gur xvat bs
Nfflevn fuhg uvz hc, naq obhaq uvz va cevfba.

17:5 Gura gur xvat bs Nfflevn pnzr hc guebhtubhg nyy gur ynaq, naq
jrag hc gb Fnznevn, naq orfvrtrq vg guerr lrnef.

17:6 Va gur avagu lrne bs Ubfurn gur xvat bs Nfflevn gbbx Fnznevn, naq
pneevrq Vfenry njnl vagb Nfflevn, naq cynprq gurz va Unynu naq va
Unobe ol gur evire bs Tbmna, naq va gur pvgvrf bs gur Zrqrf.

17:7 Sbe fb vg jnf, gung gur puvyqera bs Vfenry unq fvaarq ntnvafg gur
YBEQ gurve Tbq, juvpu unq oebhtug gurz hc bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg,
sebz haqre gur unaq bs Cunenbu xvat bs Rtlcg, naq unq srnerq bgure
tbqf, 17:8 Naq jnyxrq va gur fgnghgrf bs gur urngura, jubz gur YBEQ
pnfg bhg sebz orsber gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq bs gur xvatf bs
Vfenry, juvpu gurl unq znqr.

17:9 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq frpergyl gubfr guvatf gung jrer
abg evtug ntnvafg gur YBEQ gurve Tbq, naq gurl ohvyg gurz uvtu cynprf
va nyy gurve pvgvrf, sebz gur gbjre bs gur jngpuzra gb gur sraprq
pvgl.

17:10 Naq gurl frg gurz hc vzntrf naq tebirf va rirel uvtu uvyy, naq
haqre rirel terra gerr: 17:11 Naq gurer gurl oheag vaprafr va nyy gur
uvtu cynprf, nf qvq gur urngura jubz gur YBEQ pneevrq njnl orsber
gurz; naq jebhtug jvpxrq guvatf gb cebibxr gur YBEQ gb natre: 17:12
Sbe gurl freirq vqbyf, jurerbs gur YBEQ unq fnvq hagb gurz, Lr funyy
abg qb guvf guvat.

17:13 Lrg gur YBEQ grfgvsvrq ntnvafg Vfenry, naq ntnvafg Whqnu, ol nyy
gur cebcurgf, naq ol nyy gur frref, fnlvat, Ghea lr sebz lbhe rivy
jnlf, naq xrrc zl pbzznaqzragf naq zl fgnghgrf, nppbeqvat gb nyy gur
ynj juvpu V pbzznaqrq lbhe snguref, naq juvpu V frag gb lbh ol zl
freinagf gur cebcurgf.

17:14 Abgjvgufgnaqvat gurl jbhyq abg urne, ohg uneqrarq gurve arpxf,
yvxr gb gur arpx bs gurve snguref, gung qvq abg oryvrir va gur YBEQ
gurve Tbq.

17:15 Naq gurl erwrpgrq uvf fgnghgrf, naq uvf pbiranag gung ur znqr
jvgu gurve snguref, naq uvf grfgvzbavrf juvpu ur grfgvsvrq ntnvafg
gurz; naq gurl sbyybjrq inavgl, naq orpnzr inva, naq jrag nsgre gur
urngura gung jrer ebhaq nobhg gurz, pbapreavat jubz gur YBEQ unq
punetrq gurz, gung gurl fubhyq abg qb yvxr gurz.

17:16 Naq gurl yrsg nyy gur pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ gurve Tbq, naq
znqr gurz zbygra vzntrf, rira gjb pnyirf, naq znqr n tebir, naq
jbefuvccrq nyy gur ubfg bs urnira, naq freirq Onny.

17:17 Naq gurl pnhfrq gurve fbaf naq gurve qnhtugref gb cnff guebhtu
gur sver, naq hfrq qvivangvba naq rapunagzragf, naq fbyq gurzfryirf gb
qb rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, gb cebibxr uvz gb natre.

17:18 Gurersber gur YBEQ jnf irel natel jvgu Vfenry, naq erzbirq gurz
bhg bs uvf fvtug: gurer jnf abar yrsg ohg gur gevor bs Whqnu bayl.

17:19 Nyfb Whqnu xrcg abg gur pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ gurve Tbq, ohg
jnyxrq va gur fgnghgrf bs Vfenry juvpu gurl znqr.

17:20 Naq gur YBEQ erwrpgrq nyy gur frrq bs Vfenry, naq nssyvpgrq
gurz, naq qryvirerq gurz vagb gur unaq bs fcbvyref, hagvy ur unq pnfg
gurz bhg bs uvf fvtug.

17:21 Sbe ur erag Vfenry sebz gur ubhfr bs Qnivq; naq gurl znqr
Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong xvat: naq Wrebobnz qenir Vfenry sebz
sbyybjvat gur YBEQ, naq znqr gurz fva n terng fva.

17:22 Sbe gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jnyxrq va nyy gur fvaf bs Wrebobnz
juvpu ur qvq; gurl qrcnegrq abg sebz gurz; 17:23 Hagvy gur YBEQ
erzbirq Vfenry bhg bs uvf fvtug, nf ur unq fnvq ol nyy uvf freinagf
gur cebcurgf. Fb jnf Vfenry pneevrq njnl bhg bs gurve bja ynaq gb
Nfflevn hagb guvf qnl.

17:24 Naq gur xvat bs Nfflevn oebhtug zra sebz Onolyba, naq sebz
Phgunu, naq sebz Nin, naq sebz Unzngu, naq sebz Frcuneinvz, naq cynprq
gurz va gur pvgvrf bs Fnznevn vafgrnq bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry: naq
gurl cbffrffrq Fnznevn, naq qjryg va gur pvgvrf gurerbs.

17:25 Naq fb vg jnf ng gur ortvaavat bs gurve qjryyvat gurer, gung
gurl srnerq abg gur YBEQ: gurersber gur YBEQ frag yvbaf nzbat gurz,
juvpu fyrj fbzr bs gurz.

17:26 Jurersber gurl fcnxr gb gur xvat bs Nfflevn, fnlvat, Gur angvbaf
juvpu gubh unfg erzbirq, naq cynprq va gur pvgvrf bs Fnznevn, xabj abg
gur znaare bs gur Tbq bs gur ynaq: gurersber ur ungu frag yvbaf nzbat
gurz, naq, orubyq, gurl fynl gurz, orpnhfr gurl xabj abg gur znaare bs
gur Tbq bs gur ynaq.

17:27 Gura gur xvat bs Nfflevn pbzznaqrq, fnlvat, Pneel guvgure bar bs
gur cevrfgf jubz lr oebhtug sebz gurapr; naq yrg gurz tb naq qjryy
gurer, naq yrg uvz grnpu gurz gur znaare bs gur Tbq bs gur ynaq.

17:28 Gura bar bs gur cevrfgf jubz gurl unq pneevrq njnl sebz Fnznevn
pnzr naq qjryg va Orgury, naq gnhtug gurz ubj gurl fubhyq srne gur
YBEQ.

17:29 Ubjorvg rirel angvba znqr tbqf bs gurve bja, naq chg gurz va gur
ubhfrf bs gur uvtu cynprf juvpu gur Fnznevgnaf unq znqr, rirel angvba
va gurve pvgvrf jurerva gurl qjryg.

17:30 Naq gur zra bs Onolyba znqr Fhppbguorabgu, naq gur zra bs Phgu
znqr Aretny, naq gur zra bs Unzngu znqr Nfuvzn, 17:31 Naq gur Nivgrf
znqr Avounm naq Gnegnx, naq gur Frcuneivgrf oheag gurve puvyqera va
sver gb Nqenzzryrpu naq Nanzzryrpu, gur tbqf bs Frcuneinvz.

17:32 Fb gurl srnerq gur YBEQ, naq znqr hagb gurzfryirf bs gur ybjrfg
bs gurz cevrfgf bs gur uvtu cynprf, juvpu fnpevsvprq sbe gurz va gur
ubhfrf bs gur uvtu cynprf.

17:33 Gurl srnerq gur YBEQ, naq freirq gurve bja tbqf, nsgre gur
znaare bs gur angvbaf jubz gurl pneevrq njnl sebz gurapr.

17:34 Hagb guvf qnl gurl qb nsgre gur sbezre znaaref: gurl srne abg
gur YBEQ, arvgure qb gurl nsgre gurve fgnghgrf, be nsgre gurve
beqvanaprf, be nsgre gur ynj naq pbzznaqzrag juvpu gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq
gur puvyqera bs Wnpbo, jubz ur anzrq Vfenry; 17:35 Jvgu jubz gur YBEQ
unq znqr n pbiranag, naq punetrq gurz, fnlvat, Lr funyy abg srne bgure
tbqf, abe obj lbhefryirf gb gurz, abe freir gurz, abe fnpevsvpr gb
gurz: 17:36 Ohg gur YBEQ, jub oebhtug lbh hc bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg
jvgu terng cbjre naq n fgergpurq bhg nez, uvz funyy lr srne, naq uvz
funyy lr jbefuvc, naq gb uvz funyy lr qb fnpevsvpr.

17:37 Naq gur fgnghgrf, naq gur beqvanaprf, naq gur ynj, naq gur
pbzznaqzrag, juvpu ur jebgr sbe lbh, lr funyy bofreir gb qb sbe
rirezber; naq lr funyy abg srne bgure tbqf.

17:38 Naq gur pbiranag gung V unir znqr jvgu lbh lr funyy abg sbetrg;
arvgure funyy lr srne bgure tbqf.

17:39 Ohg gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq lr funyy srne; naq ur funyy qryvire lbh
bhg bs gur unaq bs nyy lbhe rarzvrf.

17:40 Ubjorvg gurl qvq abg urnexra, ohg gurl qvq nsgre gurve sbezre
znaare.

17:41 Fb gurfr angvbaf srnerq gur YBEQ, naq freirq gurve tenira
vzntrf, obgu gurve puvyqera, naq gurve puvyqera'f puvyqera: nf qvq
gurve snguref, fb qb gurl hagb guvf qnl.

18:1 Abj vg pnzr gb cnff va gur guveq lrne bs Ubfurn fba bs Rynu xvat
bs Vfenry, gung Urmrxvnu gur fba bs Nunm xvat bs Whqnu ortna gb ervta.

18:2 Gjragl naq svir lrnef byq jnf ur jura ur ortna gb ervta; naq ur
ervtarq gjragl naq avar lrnef va Wrehfnyrz. Uvf zbgure'f anzr nyfb jnf
Nov, gur qnhtugre bs Mnpunevnu.

18:3 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf evtug va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ,
nppbeqvat gb nyy gung Qnivq uvf sngure qvq.

18:4 Ur erzbirq gur uvtu cynprf, naq oenxr gur vzntrf, naq phg qbja
gur tebirf, naq oenxr va cvrprf gur oenfra frecrag gung Zbfrf unq
znqr: sbe hagb gubfr qnlf gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq ohea vaprafr gb
vg: naq ur pnyyrq vg Aruhfugna.

18:5 Ur gehfgrq va gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry; fb gung nsgre uvz jnf abar
yvxr uvz nzbat nyy gur xvatf bs Whqnu, abe nal gung jrer orsber uvz.

18:6 Sbe ur pynir gb gur YBEQ, naq qrcnegrq abg sebz sbyybjvat uvz,
ohg xrcg uvf pbzznaqzragf, juvpu gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Zbfrf.

18:7 Naq gur YBEQ jnf jvgu uvz; naq ur cebfcrerq juvgurefbrire ur jrag
sbegu: naq ur eroryyrq ntnvafg gur xvat bs Nfflevn, naq freirq uvz
abg.

18:8 Ur fzbgr gur Cuvyvfgvarf, rira hagb Tnmn, naq gur obeqref
gurerbs, sebz gur gbjre bs gur jngpuzra gb gur sraprq pvgl.

18:9 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gur sbhegu lrne bs xvat Urmrxvnu, juvpu
jnf gur friragu lrne bs Ubfurn fba bs Rynu xvat bs Vfenry, gung
Funyznarfre xvat bs Nfflevn pnzr hc ntnvafg Fnznevn, naq orfvrtrq vg.

18:10 Naq ng gur raq bs guerr lrnef gurl gbbx vg: rira va gur fvkgu
lrne bs Urmrxvnu, gung vf va gur avagu lrne bs Ubfurn xvat bs Vfenry,
Fnznevn jnf gnxra.

18:11 Naq gur xvat bs Nfflevn qvq pneel njnl Vfenry hagb Nfflevn, naq
chg gurz va Unynu naq va Unobe ol gur evire bs Tbmna, naq va gur
pvgvrf bs gur Zrqrf: 18:12 Orpnhfr gurl borlrq abg gur ibvpr bs gur
YBEQ gurve Tbq, ohg genafterffrq uvf pbiranag, naq nyy gung Zbfrf gur
freinag bs gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq, naq jbhyq abg urne gurz, abe qb gurz.

18:13 Abj va gur sbhegrragu lrne bs xvat Urmrxvnu qvq Fraanpurevo xvat
bs Nfflevn pbzr hc ntnvafg nyy gur sraprq pvgvrf bs Whqnu, naq gbbx
gurz.

18:14 Naq Urmrxvnu xvat bs Whqnu frag gb gur xvat bs Nfflevn gb
Ynpuvfu, fnlvat, V unir bssraqrq; erghea sebz zr: gung juvpu gubh
chggrfg ba zr jvyy V orne. Naq gur xvat bs Nfflevn nccbvagrq hagb
Urmrxvnu xvat bs Whqnu guerr uhaqerq gnyragf bs fvyire naq guvegl
gnyragf bs tbyq.

18:15 Naq Urmrxvnu tnir uvz nyy gur fvyire gung jnf sbhaq va gur ubhfr
bs gur YBEQ, naq va gur gernfherf bs gur xvat'f ubhfr.

18:16 Ng gung gvzr qvq Urmrxvnu phg bss gur tbyq sebz gur qbbef bs gur
grzcyr bs gur YBEQ, naq sebz gur cvyynef juvpu Urmrxvnu xvat bs Whqnu
unq bireynvq, naq tnir vg gb gur xvat bs Nfflevn.

18:17 Naq gur xvat bs Nfflevn frag Gnegna naq Enofnevf naq Enofunxru
sebz Ynpuvfu gb xvat Urmrxvnu jvgu n terng ubfg ntnvafg Wrehfnyrz. Naq
gurl jrag hc naq pnzr gb Wrehfnyrz. Naq jura gurl jrer pbzr hc, gurl
pnzr naq fgbbq ol gur pbaqhvg bs gur hccre cbby, juvpu vf va gur
uvtujnl bs gur shyyre'f svryq.

18:18 Naq jura gurl unq pnyyrq gb gur xvat, gurer pnzr bhg gb gurz
Ryvnxvz gur fba bs Uvyxvnu, juvpu jnf bire gur ubhfrubyq, naq Furoan
gur fpevor, naq Wbnu gur fba bs Nfncu gur erpbeqre.

18:19 Naq Enofunxru fnvq hagb gurz, Fcrnx lr abj gb Urmrxvnu, Guhf
fnvgu gur terng xvat, gur xvat bs Nfflevn, Jung pbasvqrapr vf guvf
jurerva gubh gehfgrfg?  18:20 Gubh fnlrfg, (ohg gurl ner ohg inva
jbeqf,) V unir pbhafry naq fgeratgu sbe gur jne. Abj ba jubz qbfg gubh
gehfg, gung gubh eroryyrfg ntnvafg zr?  18:21 Abj, orubyq, gubh
gehfgrfg hcba gur fgnss bs guvf oehvfrq errq, rira hcba Rtlcg, ba
juvpu vs n zna yrna, vg jvyy tb vagb uvf unaq, naq cvrepr vg: fb vf
Cunenbu xvat bs Rtlcg hagb nyy gung gehfg ba uvz.

18:22 Ohg vs lr fnl hagb zr, Jr gehfg va gur YBEQ bhe Tbq: vf abg gung
ur, jubfr uvtu cynprf naq jubfr nygnef Urmrxvnu ungu gnxra njnl, naq
ungu fnvq gb Whqnu naq Wrehfnyrz, Lr funyy jbefuvc orsber guvf nygne
va Wrehfnyrz?  18:23 Abj gurersber, V cenl gurr, tvir cyrqtrf gb zl
ybeq gur xvat bs Nfflevn, naq V jvyy qryvire gurr gjb gubhfnaq ubefrf,
vs gubh or noyr ba gul cneg gb frg evqref hcba gurz.

18:24 Ubj gura jvyg gubh ghea njnl gur snpr bs bar pncgnva bs gur
yrnfg bs zl znfgre'f freinagf, naq chg gul gehfg ba Rtlcg sbe punevbgf
naq sbe ubefrzra?  18:25 Nz V abj pbzr hc jvgubhg gur YBEQ ntnvafg
guvf cynpr gb qrfgebl vg?  Gur YBEQ fnvq gb zr, Tb hc ntnvafg guvf
ynaq, naq qrfgebl vg.

18:26 Gura fnvq Ryvnxvz gur fba bs Uvyxvnu, naq Furoan, naq Wbnu, hagb
Enofunxru, Fcrnx, V cenl gurr, gb gul freinagf va gur Flevna ynathntr;
sbe jr haqrefgnaq vg: naq gnyx abg jvgu hf va gur Wrjf' ynathntr va
gur rnef bs gur crbcyr gung ner ba gur jnyy.

18:27 Ohg Enofunxru fnvq hagb gurz, Ungu zl znfgre frag zr gb gul
znfgre, naq gb gurr, gb fcrnx gurfr jbeqf? ungu ur abg frag zr gb gur
zra juvpu fvg ba gur jnyy, gung gurl znl rng gurve bja qhat, naq qevax
gurve bja cvff jvgu lbh?  18:28 Gura Enofunxru fgbbq naq pevrq jvgu n
ybhq ibvpr va gur Wrjf' ynathntr, naq fcnxr, fnlvat, Urne gur jbeq bs
gur terng xvat, gur xvat bs Nfflevn: 18:29 Guhf fnvgu gur xvat, Yrg
abg Urmrxvnu qrprvir lbh: sbe ur funyy abg or noyr gb qryvire lbh bhg
bs uvf unaq: 18:30 Arvgure yrg Urmrxvnu znxr lbh gehfg va gur YBEQ,
fnlvat, Gur YBEQ jvyy fheryl qryvire hf, naq guvf pvgl funyy abg or
qryvirerq vagb gur unaq bs gur xvat bs Nfflevn.

18:31 Urnexra abg gb Urmrxvnu: sbe guhf fnvgu gur xvat bs Nfflevn,
Znxr na nterrzrag jvgu zr ol n cerfrag, naq pbzr bhg gb zr, naq gura
rng lr rirel zna bs uvf bja ivar, naq rirel bar bs uvf svt gerr, naq
qevax lr rirel bar gur jngref bs uvf pvfgrea: 18:32 Hagvy V pbzr naq
gnxr lbh njnl gb n ynaq yvxr lbhe bja ynaq, n ynaq bs pbea naq jvar, n
ynaq bs oernq naq ivarlneqf, n ynaq bs bvy byvir naq bs ubarl, gung lr
znl yvir, naq abg qvr: naq urnexra abg hagb Urmrxvnu, jura ur
crefhnqrgu lbh, fnlvat, Gur YBEQ jvyy qryvire hf.

18:33 Ungu nal bs gur tbqf bs gur angvbaf qryvirerq ng nyy uvf ynaq
bhg bs gur unaq bs gur xvat bs Nfflevn?  18:34 Jurer ner gur tbqf bs
Unzngu, naq bs Necnq? jurer ner gur tbqf bs Frcuneinvz, Uran, naq
Vinu? unir gurl qryvirerq Fnznevn bhg bs zvar unaq?  18:35 Jub ner
gurl nzbat nyy gur tbqf bs gur pbhagevrf, gung unir qryvirerq gurve
pbhagel bhg bs zvar unaq, gung gur YBEQ fubhyq qryvire Wrehfnyrz bhg
bs zvar unaq?  18:36 Ohg gur crbcyr uryq gurve crnpr, naq nafjrerq uvz
abg n jbeq: sbe gur xvat'f pbzznaqzrag jnf, fnlvat, Nafjre uvz abg.

18:37 Gura pnzr Ryvnxvz gur fba bs Uvyxvnu, juvpu jnf bire gur
ubhfrubyq, naq Furoan gur fpevor, naq Wbnu gur fba bs Nfncu gur
erpbeqre, gb Urmrxvnu jvgu gurve pybgurf erag, naq gbyq uvz gur jbeqf
bs Enofunxru.

19:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura xvat Urmrxvnu urneq vg, gung ur erag
uvf pybgurf, naq pbirerq uvzfrys jvgu fnpxpybgu, naq jrag vagb gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

19:2 Naq ur frag Ryvnxvz, juvpu jnf bire gur ubhfrubyq, naq Furoan gur
fpevor, naq gur ryqref bs gur cevrfgf, pbirerq jvgu fnpxpybgu, gb
Vfnvnu gur cebcurg gur fba bs Nzbm.

19:3 Naq gurl fnvq hagb uvz, Guhf fnvgu Urmrxvnu, Guvf qnl vf n qnl bs
gebhoyr, naq bs erohxr, naq oynfcurzl; sbe gur puvyqera ner pbzr gb
gur ovegu, naq gurer vf abg fgeratgu gb oevat sbegu.

19:4 Vg znl or gur YBEQ gul Tbq jvyy urne nyy gur jbeqf bs Enofunxru,
jubz gur xvat bs Nfflevn uvf znfgre ungu frag gb ercebnpu gur yvivat
Tbq; naq jvyy ercebir gur jbeqf juvpu gur YBEQ gul Tbq ungu urneq:
jurersber yvsg hc gul cenlre sbe gur erzanag gung ner yrsg.

19:5 Fb gur freinagf bs xvat Urmrxvnu pnzr gb Vfnvnu.

19:6 Naq Vfnvnu fnvq hagb gurz, Guhf funyy lr fnl gb lbhe znfgre, Guhf
fnvgu gur YBEQ, Or abg nsenvq bs gur jbeqf juvpu gubh unfg urneq, jvgu
juvpu gur freinagf bs gur xvat bs Nfflevn unir oynfcurzrq zr.

19:7 Orubyq, V jvyy fraq n oynfg hcba uvz, naq ur funyy urne n ehzbhe,
naq funyy erghea gb uvf bja ynaq; naq V jvyy pnhfr uvz gb snyy ol gur
fjbeq va uvf bja ynaq.

19:8 Fb Enofunxru erghearq, naq sbhaq gur xvat bs Nfflevn jneevat
ntnvafg Yvoanu: sbe ur unq urneq gung ur jnf qrcnegrq sebz Ynpuvfu.

19:9 Naq jura ur urneq fnl bs Gveunxnu xvat bs Rguvbcvn, Orubyq, ur vf
pbzr bhg gb svtug ntnvafg gurr: ur frag zrffratref ntnva hagb
Urmrxvnu, fnlvat, 19:10 Guhf funyy lr fcrnx gb Urmrxvnu xvat bs Whqnu,
fnlvat, Yrg abg gul Tbq va jubz gubh gehfgrfg qrprvir gurr, fnlvat,
Wrehfnyrz funyy abg or qryvirerq vagb gur unaq bs gur xvat bs Nfflevn.

19:11 Orubyq, gubh unfg urneq jung gur xvatf bs Nfflevn unir qbar gb
nyy ynaqf, ol qrfgeblvat gurz hggreyl: naq funyg gubh or qryvirerq?
19:12 Unir gur tbqf bs gur angvbaf qryvirerq gurz juvpu zl snguref
unir qrfgeblrq; nf Tbmna, naq Unena, naq Ermrcu, naq gur puvyqera bs
Rqra juvpu jrer va Gurynfne?  19:13 Jurer vf gur xvat bs Unzngu, naq
gur xvat bs Necnq, naq gur xvat bs gur pvgl bs Frcuneinvz, bs Uran,
naq Vinu?  19:14 Naq Urmrxvnu erprvirq gur yrggre bs gur unaq bs gur
zrffratref, naq ernq vg: naq Urmrxvnu jrag hc vagb gur ubhfr bs gur
YBEQ, naq fcernq vg orsber gur YBEQ.

19:15 Naq Urmrxvnu cenlrq orsber gur YBEQ, naq fnvq, B YBEQ Tbq bs
Vfenry, juvpu qjryyrfg orgjrra gur purehovzf, gubh neg gur Tbq, rira
gubh nybar, bs nyy gur xvatqbzf bs gur rnegu; gubh unfg znqr urnira
naq rnegu.

19:16 YBEQ, obj qbja guvar rne, naq urne: bcra, YBEQ, guvar rlrf, naq
frr: naq urne gur jbeqf bs Fraanpurevo, juvpu ungu frag uvz gb
ercebnpu gur yvivat Tbq.

19:17 Bs n gehgu, YBEQ, gur xvatf bs Nfflevn unir qrfgeblrq gur
angvbaf naq gurve ynaqf, 19:18 Naq unir pnfg gurve tbqf vagb gur sver:
sbe gurl jrer ab tbqf, ohg gur jbex bs zra'f unaqf, jbbq naq fgbar:
gurersber gurl unir qrfgeblrq gurz.

19:19 Abj gurersber, B YBEQ bhe Tbq, V orfrrpu gurr, fnir gubh hf bhg
bs uvf unaq, gung nyy gur xvatqbzf bs gur rnegu znl xabj gung gubh neg
gur YBEQ Tbq, rira gubh bayl.

19:20 Gura Vfnvnu gur fba bs Nzbm frag gb Urmrxvnu, fnlvat, Guhf fnvgu
gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, Gung juvpu gubh unfg cenlrq gb zr ntnvafg
Fraanpurevo xvat bs Nfflevn V unir urneq.

19:21 Guvf vf gur jbeq gung gur YBEQ ungu fcbxra pbapreavat uvz; Gur
ivetva gur qnhtugre bs Mvba ungu qrfcvfrq gurr, naq ynhturq gurr gb
fpbea; gur qnhtugre bs Wrehfnyrz ungu funxra ure urnq ng gurr.

19:22 Jubz unfg gubh ercebnpurq naq oynfcurzrq? naq ntnvafg jubz unfg
gubh rknygrq gul ibvpr, naq yvsgrq hc guvar rlrf ba uvtu? rira ntnvafg
gur Ubyl Bar bs Vfenry.

19:23 Ol gul zrffratref gubh unfg ercebnpurq gur YBEQ, naq unfg fnvq,
Jvgu gur zhygvghqr bs zl punevbgf V nz pbzr hc gb gur urvtug bs gur
zbhagnvaf, gb gur fvqrf bs Yronaba, naq jvyy phg qbja gur gnyy prqne
gerrf gurerbs, naq gur pubvpr sve gerrf gurerbs: naq V jvyy ragre vagb
gur ybqtvatf bs uvf obeqref, naq vagb gur sberfg bs uvf Pnezry.

19:24 V unir qvttrq naq qehax fgenatr jngref, naq jvgu gur fbyr bs zl
srrg unir V qevrq hc nyy gur eviref bs orfvrtrq cynprf.

19:25 Unfg gubh abg urneq ybat ntb ubj V unir qbar vg, naq bs napvrag
gvzrf gung V unir sbezrq vg? abj unir V oebhtug vg gb cnff, gung gubh
fubhyqrfg or gb ynl jnfgr sraprq pvgvrf vagb ehvabhf urncf.

19:26 Gurersber gurve vaunovgnagf jrer bs fznyy cbjre, gurl jrer
qvfznlrq naq pbasbhaqrq; gurl jrer nf gur tenff bs gur svryq, naq nf
gur terra ureo, nf gur tenff ba gur ubhfr gbcf, naq nf pbea oynfgrq
orsber vg or tebja hc.

19:27 Ohg V xabj gul nobqr, naq gul tbvat bhg, naq gul pbzvat va, naq
gul entr ntnvafg zr.

19:28 Orpnhfr gul entr ntnvafg zr naq gul ghzhyg vf pbzr hc vagb zvar
rnef, gurersber V jvyy chg zl ubbx va gul abfr, naq zl oevqyr va gul
yvcf, naq V jvyy ghea gurr onpx ol gur jnl ol juvpu gubh pnzrfg.

19:29 Naq guvf funyy or n fvta hagb gurr, Lr funyy rng guvf lrne fhpu
guvatf nf tebj bs gurzfryirf, naq va gur frpbaq lrne gung juvpu
fcevatrgu bs gur fnzr; naq va gur guveq lrne fbj lr, naq ernc, naq
cynag ivarlneqf, naq rng gur sehvgf gurerbs.

19:30 Naq gur erzanag gung vf rfpncrq bs gur ubhfr bs Whqnu funyy lrg
ntnva gnxr ebbg qbjajneq, naq orne sehvg hcjneq.

19:31 Sbe bhg bs Wrehfnyrz funyy tb sbegu n erzanag, naq gurl gung
rfpncr bhg bs zbhag Mvba: gur mrny bs gur YBEQ bs ubfgf funyy qb guvf.

19:32 Gurersber guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ pbapreavat gur xvat bs Nfflevn, Ur
funyy abg pbzr vagb guvf pvgl, abe fubbg na neebj gurer, abe pbzr
orsber vg jvgu fuvryq, abe pnfg n onax ntnvafg vg.

19:33 Ol gur jnl gung ur pnzr, ol gur fnzr funyy ur erghea, naq funyy
abg pbzr vagb guvf pvgl, fnvgu gur YBEQ.

19:34 Sbe V jvyy qrsraq guvf pvgl, gb fnir vg, sbe zvar bja fnxr, naq
sbe zl freinag Qnivq'f fnxr.

19:35 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff gung avtug, gung gur natry bs gur YBEQ jrag
bhg, naq fzbgr va gur pnzc bs gur Nfflevnaf na uhaqerq sbhefpber naq
svir gubhfnaq: naq jura gurl nebfr rneyl va gur zbeavat, orubyq, gurl
jrer nyy qrnq pbecfrf.

19:36 Fb Fraanpurevo xvat bs Nfflevn qrcnegrq, naq jrag naq erghearq,
naq qjryg ng Avariru.

19:37 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf ur jnf jbefuvccvat va gur ubhfr bs
Avfebpu uvf tbq, gung Nqenzzryrpu naq Funermre uvf fbaf fzbgr uvz jvgu
gur fjbeq: naq gurl rfpncrq vagb gur ynaq bs Nezravn. Naq Rfneunqqba
uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

20:1 Va gubfr qnlf jnf Urmrxvnu fvpx hagb qrngu. Naq gur cebcurg
Vfnvnu gur fba bs Nzbm pnzr gb uvz, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Guhf fnvgu gur
YBEQ, Frg guvar ubhfr va beqre; sbe gubh funyg qvr, naq abg yvir.

20:2 Gura ur ghearq uvf snpr gb gur jnyy, naq cenlrq hagb gur YBEQ,
fnlvat, 20:3 V orfrrpu gurr, B YBEQ, erzrzore abj ubj V unir jnyxrq
orsber gurr va gehgu naq jvgu n cresrpg urneg, naq unir qbar gung
juvpu vf tbbq va gul fvtug. Naq Urmrxvnu jrcg fber.

20:4 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nsber Vfnvnu jnf tbar bhg vagb gur zvqqyr
pbheg, gung gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ pnzr gb uvz, fnlvat, 20:5 Ghea ntnva,
naq gryy Urmrxvnu gur pncgnva bs zl crbcyr, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, gur
Tbq bs Qnivq gul sngure, V unir urneq gul cenlre, V unir frra gul
grnef: orubyq, V jvyy urny gurr: ba gur guveq qnl gubh funyg tb hc
hagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

20:6 Naq V jvyy nqq hagb gul qnlf svsgrra lrnef; naq V jvyy qryvire
gurr naq guvf pvgl bhg bs gur unaq bs gur xvat bs Nfflevn; naq V jvyy
qrsraq guvf pvgl sbe zvar bja fnxr, naq sbe zl freinag Qnivq'f fnxr.

20:7 Naq Vfnvnu fnvq, Gnxr n yhzc bs svtf. Naq gurl gbbx naq ynvq vg
ba gur obvy, naq ur erpbirerq.

20:8 Naq Urmrxvnu fnvq hagb Vfnvnu, Jung funyy or gur fvta gung gur
YBEQ jvyy urny zr, naq gung V funyy tb hc vagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ
gur guveq qnl?  20:9 Naq Vfnvnu fnvq, Guvf fvta funyg gubh unir bs gur
YBEQ, gung gur YBEQ jvyy qb gur guvat gung ur ungu fcbxra: funyy gur
funqbj tb sbejneq gra qrterrf, be tb onpx gra qrterrf?  20:10 Naq
Urmrxvnu nafjrerq, Vg vf n yvtug guvat sbe gur funqbj gb tb qbja gra
qrterrf: anl, ohg yrg gur funqbj erghea onpxjneq gra qrterrf.

20:11 Naq Vfnvnu gur cebcurg pevrq hagb gur YBEQ: naq ur oebhtug gur
funqbj gra qrterrf onpxjneq, ol juvpu vg unq tbar qbja va gur qvny bs
Nunm.

20:12 Ng gung gvzr Orebqnpuonynqna, gur fba bs Onynqna, xvat bs
Onolyba, frag yrggref naq n cerfrag hagb Urmrxvnu: sbe ur unq urneq
gung Urmrxvnu unq orra fvpx.

20:13 Naq Urmrxvnu urnexrarq hagb gurz, naq furjrq gurz nyy gur ubhfr
bs uvf cerpvbhf guvatf, gur fvyire, naq gur tbyq, naq gur fcvprf, naq
gur cerpvbhf bvagzrag, naq nyy gur ubhfr bs uvf nezbhe, naq nyy gung
jnf sbhaq va uvf gernfherf: gurer jnf abguvat va uvf ubhfr, abe va nyy
uvf qbzvavba, gung Urmrxvnu furjrq gurz abg.

20:14 Gura pnzr Vfnvnu gur cebcurg hagb xvat Urmrxvnu, naq fnvq hagb
uvz, Jung fnvq gurfr zra? naq sebz jurapr pnzr gurl hagb gurr? Naq
Urmrxvnu fnvq, Gurl ner pbzr sebz n sne pbhagel, rira sebz Onolyba.

20:15 Naq ur fnvq, Jung unir gurl frra va guvar ubhfr? Naq Urmrxvnu
nafjrerq, Nyy gur guvatf gung ner va zvar ubhfr unir gurl frra: gurer
vf abguvat nzbat zl gernfherf gung V unir abg furjrq gurz.

20:16 Naq Vfnvnu fnvq hagb Urmrxvnu, Urne gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ.

20:17 Orubyq, gur qnlf pbzr, gung nyy gung vf va guvar ubhfr, naq gung
juvpu gul snguref unir ynvq hc va fgber hagb guvf qnl, funyy or
pneevrq vagb Onolyba: abguvat funyy or yrsg, fnvgu gur YBEQ.

20:18 Naq bs gul fbaf gung funyy vffhr sebz gurr, juvpu gubh funyg
ortrg, funyy gurl gnxr njnl; naq gurl funyy or rhahpuf va gur cnynpr
bs gur xvat bs Onolyba.

20:19 Gura fnvq Urmrxvnu hagb Vfnvnu, Tbbq vf gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ
juvpu gubh unfg fcbxra. Naq ur fnvq, Vf vg abg tbbq, vs crnpr naq
gehgu or va zl qnlf?  20:20 Naq gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Urmrxvnu, naq
nyy uvf zvtug, naq ubj ur znqr n cbby, naq n pbaqhvg, naq oebhtug
jngre vagb gur pvgl, ner gurl abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur
puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Whqnu?  20:21 Naq Urmrxvnu fyrcg jvgu uvf
snguref: naq Znanffru uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

21:1 Znanffru jnf gjryir lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq ervtarq
svsgl naq svir lrnef va Wrehfnyrz. Naq uvf zbgure'f anzr jnf
Urcumvonu.

21:2 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, nsgre
gur nobzvangvbaf bs gur urngura, jubz gur YBEQ pnfg bhg orsber gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry.

21:3 Sbe ur ohvyg hc ntnva gur uvtu cynprf juvpu Urmrxvnu uvf sngure
unq qrfgeblrq; naq ur ernerq hc nygnef sbe Onny, naq znqr n tebir, nf
qvq Nuno xvat bs Vfenry; naq jbefuvccrq nyy gur ubfg bs urnira, naq
freirq gurz.

21:4 Naq ur ohvyg nygnef va gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, bs juvpu gur YBEQ
fnvq, Va Wrehfnyrz jvyy V chg zl anzr.

21:5 Naq ur ohvyg nygnef sbe nyy gur ubfg bs urnira va gur gjb pbhegf
bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

21:6 Naq ur znqr uvf fba cnff guebhtu gur sver, naq bofreirq gvzrf,
naq hfrq rapunagzragf, naq qrnyg jvgu snzvyvne fcvevgf naq jvmneqf: ur
jebhtug zhpu jvpxrqarff va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, gb cebibxr uvz gb
natre.

21:7 Naq ur frg n tenira vzntr bs gur tebir gung ur unq znqr va gur
ubhfr, bs juvpu gur YBEQ fnvq gb Qnivq, naq gb Fbybzba uvf fba, Va
guvf ubhfr, naq va Wrehfnyrz, juvpu V unir pubfra bhg bs nyy gevorf bs
Vfenry, jvyy V chg zl anzr sbe rire: 21:8 Arvgure jvyy V znxr gur srrg
bs Vfenry zbir nal zber bhg bs gur ynaq juvpu V tnir gurve snguref;
bayl vs gurl jvyy bofreir gb qb nppbeqvat gb nyy gung V unir pbzznaqrq
gurz, naq nppbeqvat gb nyy gur ynj gung zl freinag Zbfrf pbzznaqrq
gurz.

21:9 Ohg gurl urnexrarq abg: naq Znanffru frqhprq gurz gb qb zber rivy
guna qvq gur angvbaf jubz gur YBEQ qrfgeblrq orsber gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry.

21:10 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr ol uvf freinagf gur cebcurgf, fnlvat, 21:11
Orpnhfr Znanffru xvat bs Whqnu ungu qbar gurfr nobzvangvbaf, naq ungu
qbar jvpxrqyl nobir nyy gung gur Nzbevgrf qvq, juvpu jrer orsber uvz,
naq ungu znqr Whqnu nyfb gb fva jvgu uvf vqbyf: 21:12 Gurersber guhf
fnvgu gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, Orubyq, V nz oevatvat fhpu rivy hcba
Wrehfnyrz naq Whqnu, gung jubfbrire urnergu bs vg, obgu uvf rnef funyy
gvatyr.

21:13 Naq V jvyy fgergpu bire Wrehfnyrz gur yvar bs Fnznevn, naq gur
cyhzzrg bs gur ubhfr bs Nuno: naq V jvyy jvcr Wrehfnyrz nf n zna
jvcrgu n qvfu, jvcvat vg, naq gheavat vg hcfvqr qbja.

21:14 Naq V jvyy sbefnxr gur erzanag bs zvar vaurevgnapr, naq qryvire
gurz vagb gur unaq bs gurve rarzvrf; naq gurl funyy orpbzr n cerl naq
n fcbvy gb nyy gurve rarzvrf; 21:15 Orpnhfr gurl unir qbar gung juvpu
jnf rivy va zl fvtug, naq unir cebibxrq zr gb natre, fvapr gur qnl
gurve snguref pnzr sbegu bhg bs Rtlcg, rira hagb guvf qnl.

21:16 Zberbire Znanffru furq vaabprag oybbq irel zhpu, gvyy ur unq
svyyrq Wrehfnyrz sebz bar raq gb nabgure; orfvqr uvf fva jurerjvgu ur
znqr Whqnu gb fva, va qbvat gung juvpu jnf rivy va gur fvtug bs gur
YBEQ.

21:17 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Znanffru, naq nyy gung ur qvq, naq
uvf fva gung ur fvaarq, ner gurl abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur
puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Whqnu?  21:18 Naq Znanffru fyrcg jvgu uvf
snguref, naq jnf ohevrq va gur tneqra bs uvf bja ubhfr, va gur tneqra
bs Hmmn: naq Nzba uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

21:19 Nzba jnf gjragl naq gjb lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq ur
ervtarq gjb lrnef va Wrehfnyrz. Naq uvf zbgure'f anzr jnf
Zrfuhyyrzrgu, gur qnhtugre bs Unehm bs Wbgonu.

21:20 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, nf uvf
sngure Znanffru qvq.

21:21 Naq ur jnyxrq va nyy gur jnl gung uvf sngure jnyxrq va, naq
freirq gur vqbyf gung uvf sngure freirq, naq jbefuvccrq gurz: 21:22
Naq ur sbefbbx gur YBEQ Tbq bs uvf snguref, naq jnyxrq abg va gur jnl
bs gur YBEQ.

21:23 Naq gur freinagf bs Nzba pbafcverq ntnvafg uvz, naq fyrj gur
xvat va uvf bja ubhfr.

21:24 Naq gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq fyrj nyy gurz gung unq pbafcverq
ntnvafg xvat Nzba; naq gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq znqr Wbfvnu uvf fba xvat
va uvf fgrnq.

21:25 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Nzba juvpu ur qvq, ner gurl abg
jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Whqnu?  21:26
Naq ur jnf ohevrq va uvf frchypuer va gur tneqra bs Hmmn: naq Wbfvnu
uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

22:1 Wbfvnu jnf rvtug lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq ur ervtarq
guvegl naq bar lrnef va Wrehfnyrz. Naq uvf zbgure'f anzr jnf Wrqvqnu,
gur qnhtugre bs Nqnvnu bs Obfpngu.

22:2 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf evtug va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, naq
jnyxrq va nyy gur jnl bs Qnivq uvf sngure, naq ghearq abg nfvqr gb gur
evtug unaq be gb gur yrsg.

22:3 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gur rvtugrragu lrne bs xvat Wbfvnu, gung
gur xvat frag Funcuna gur fba bs Nmnyvnu, gur fba bs Zrfuhyynz, gur
fpevor, gb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, fnlvat, 22:4 Tb hc gb Uvyxvnu gur
uvtu cevrfg, gung ur znl fhz gur fvyire juvpu vf oebhtug vagb gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, juvpu gur xrrcref bs gur qbbe unir tngurerq bs gur
crbcyr: 22:5 Naq yrg gurz qryvire vg vagb gur unaq bs gur qbref bs gur
jbex, gung unir gur birefvtug bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ: naq yrg gurz
tvir vg gb gur qbref bs gur jbex juvpu vf va gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, gb
ercnve gur oernpurf bs gur ubhfr, 22:6 Hagb pnecragref, naq ohvyqref,
naq znfbaf, naq gb ohl gvzore naq urja fgbar gb ercnve gur ubhfr.

22:7 Ubjorvg gurer jnf ab erpxbavat znqr jvgu gurz bs gur zbarl gung
jnf qryvirerq vagb gurve unaq, orpnhfr gurl qrnyg snvgushyyl.

22:8 Naq Uvyxvnu gur uvtu cevrfg fnvq hagb Funcuna gur fpevor, V unir
sbhaq gur obbx bs gur ynj va gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ. Naq Uvyxvnu tnir
gur obbx gb Funcuna, naq ur ernq vg.

22:9 Naq Funcuna gur fpevor pnzr gb gur xvat, naq oebhtug gur xvat
jbeq ntnva, naq fnvq, Gul freinagf unir tngurerq gur zbarl gung jnf
sbhaq va gur ubhfr, naq unir qryvirerq vg vagb gur unaq bs gurz gung
qb gur jbex, gung unir gur birefvtug bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

22:10 Naq Funcuna gur fpevor furjrq gur xvat, fnlvat, Uvyxvnu gur
cevrfg ungu qryvirerq zr n obbx. Naq Funcuna ernq vg orsber gur xvat.

22:11 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur xvat unq urneq gur jbeqf bs gur
obbx bs gur ynj, gung ur erag uvf pybgurf.

22:12 Naq gur xvat pbzznaqrq Uvyxvnu gur cevrfg, naq Nuvxnz gur fba bs
Funcuna, naq Npuobe gur fba bs Zvpunvnu, naq Funcuna gur fpevor, naq
Nfnuvnu n freinag bs gur xvat'f, fnlvat, 22:13 Tb lr, radhver bs gur
YBEQ sbe zr, naq sbe gur crbcyr, naq sbe nyy Whqnu, pbapreavat gur
jbeqf bs guvf obbx gung vf sbhaq: sbe terng vf gur jengu bs gur YBEQ
gung vf xvaqyrq ntnvafg hf, orpnhfr bhe snguref unir abg urnexrarq
hagb gur jbeqf bs guvf obbx, gb qb nppbeqvat hagb nyy gung juvpu vf
jevggra pbapreavat hf.

22:14 Fb Uvyxvnu gur cevrfg, naq Nuvxnz, naq Npuobe, naq Funcuna, naq
Nfnuvnu, jrag hagb Uhyqnu gur cebcurgrff, gur jvsr bs Funyyhz gur fba
bs Gvxinu, gur fba bs Uneunf, xrrcre bs gur jneqebor; (abj fur qjryg
va Wrehfnyrz va gur pbyyrtr;) naq gurl pbzzharq jvgu ure.

22:15 Naq fur fnvq hagb gurz, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, Gryy
gur zna gung frag lbh gb zr, 22:16 Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Orubyq, V jvyy
oevat rivy hcba guvf cynpr, naq hcba gur vaunovgnagf gurerbs, rira nyy
gur jbeqf bs gur obbx juvpu gur xvat bs Whqnu ungu ernq: 22:17 Orpnhfr
gurl unir sbefnxra zr, naq unir ohearq vaprafr hagb bgure tbqf, gung
gurl zvtug cebibxr zr gb natre jvgu nyy gur jbexf bs gurve unaqf;
gurersber zl jengu funyy or xvaqyrq ntnvafg guvf cynpr, naq funyy abg
or dhrapurq.

22:18 Ohg gb gur xvat bs Whqnu juvpu frag lbh gb radhver bs gur YBEQ,
guhf funyy lr fnl gb uvz, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, Nf
gbhpuvat gur jbeqf juvpu gubh unfg urneq; 22:19 Orpnhfr guvar urneg
jnf graqre, naq gubh unfg uhzoyrq gulfrys orsber gur YBEQ, jura gubh
urneqrfg jung V fcnxr ntnvafg guvf cynpr, naq ntnvafg gur vaunovgnagf
gurerbs, gung gurl fubhyq orpbzr n qrfbyngvba naq n phefr, naq unfg
erag gul pybgurf, naq jrcg orsber zr; V nyfb unir urneq gurr, fnvgu
gur YBEQ.

22:20 Orubyq gurersber, V jvyy tngure gurr hagb gul snguref, naq gubh
funyg or tngurerq vagb gul tenir va crnpr; naq guvar rlrf funyy abg
frr nyy gur rivy juvpu V jvyy oevat hcba guvf cynpr. Naq gurl oebhtug
gur xvat jbeq ntnva.

23:1 Naq gur xvat frag, naq gurl tngurerq hagb uvz nyy gur ryqref bs
Whqnu naq bs Wrehfnyrz.

23:2 Naq gur xvat jrag hc vagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq nyy gur zra
bs Whqnu naq nyy gur vaunovgnagf bs Wrehfnyrz jvgu uvz, naq gur
cevrfgf, naq gur cebcurgf, naq nyy gur crbcyr, obgu fznyy naq terng:
naq ur ernq va gurve rnef nyy gur jbeqf bs gur obbx bs gur pbiranag
juvpu jnf sbhaq va gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

23:3 Naq gur xvat fgbbq ol n cvyyne, naq znqr n pbiranag orsber gur
YBEQ, gb jnyx nsgre gur YBEQ, naq gb xrrc uvf pbzznaqzragf naq uvf
grfgvzbavrf naq uvf fgnghgrf jvgu nyy gurve urneg naq nyy gurve fbhy,
gb cresbez gur jbeqf bs guvf pbiranag gung jrer jevggra va guvf obbx.
Naq nyy gur crbcyr fgbbq gb gur pbiranag.

23:4 Naq gur xvat pbzznaqrq Uvyxvnu gur uvtu cevrfg, naq gur cevrfgf
bs gur frpbaq beqre, naq gur xrrcref bs gur qbbe, gb oevat sbegu bhg
bs gur grzcyr bs gur YBEQ nyy gur irffryf gung jrer znqr sbe Onny, naq
sbe gur tebir, naq sbe nyy gur ubfg bs urnira: naq ur ohearq gurz
jvgubhg Wrehfnyrz va gur svryqf bs Xvqeba, naq pneevrq gur nfurf bs
gurz hagb Orgury.

23:5 Naq ur chg qbja gur vqbyngebhf cevrfgf, jubz gur xvatf bs Whqnu
unq beqnvarq gb ohea vaprafr va gur uvtu cynprf va gur pvgvrf bs
Whqnu, naq va gur cynprf ebhaq nobhg Wrehfnyrz; gurz nyfb gung ohearq
vaprafr hagb Onny, gb gur fha, naq gb gur zbba, naq gb gur cynargf,
naq gb nyy gur ubfg bs urnira.

23:6 Naq ur oebhtug bhg gur tebir sebz gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, jvgubhg
Wrehfnyrz, hagb gur oebbx Xvqeba, naq ohearq vg ng gur oebbx Xvqeba,
naq fgnzcrq vg fznyy gb cbjqre, naq pnfg gur cbjqre gurerbs hcba gur
tenirf bs gur puvyqera bs gur crbcyr.

23:7 Naq ur oenxr qbja gur ubhfrf bs gur fbqbzvgrf, gung jrer ol gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, jurer gur jbzra jbir unatvatf sbe gur tebir.

23:8 Naq ur oebhtug nyy gur cevrfgf bhg bs gur pvgvrf bs Whqnu, naq
qrsvyrq gur uvtu cynprf jurer gur cevrfgf unq ohearq vaprafr, sebz
Tron gb Orrefuron, naq oenxr qbja gur uvtu cynprf bs gur tngrf gung
jrer va gur ragrevat va bs gur tngr bs Wbfuhn gur tbireabe bs gur
pvgl, juvpu jrer ba n zna'f yrsg unaq ng gur tngr bs gur pvgl.

23:9 Arireguryrff gur cevrfgf bs gur uvtu cynprf pnzr abg hc gb gur
nygne bs gur YBEQ va Wrehfnyrz, ohg gurl qvq rng bs gur hayrnirarq
oernq nzbat gurve oerguera.

23:10 Naq ur qrsvyrq Gbcurgu, juvpu vf va gur inyyrl bs gur puvyqera
bs Uvaabz, gung ab zna zvtug znxr uvf fba be uvf qnhtugre gb cnff
guebhtu gur sver gb Zbyrpu.

23:11 Naq ur gbbx njnl gur ubefrf gung gur xvatf bs Whqnu unq tvira gb
gur fha, ng gur ragrevat va bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, ol gur punzore
bs Angunazryrpu gur punzoreynva, juvpu jnf va gur fhoheof, naq ohearq
gur punevbgf bs gur fha jvgu sver.

23:12 Naq gur nygnef gung jrer ba gur gbc bs gur hccre punzore bs
Nunm, juvpu gur xvatf bs Whqnu unq znqr, naq gur nygnef juvpu Znanffru
unq znqr va gur gjb pbhegf bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, qvq gur xvat orng
qbja, naq oenxr gurz qbja sebz gurapr, naq pnfg gur qhfg bs gurz vagb
gur oebbx Xvqeba.

23:13 Naq gur uvtu cynprf gung jrer orsber Wrehfnyrz, juvpu jrer ba
gur evtug unaq bs gur zbhag bs pbeehcgvba, juvpu Fbybzba gur xvat bs
Vfenry unq ohvyqrq sbe Nfugbergu gur nobzvangvba bs gur Mvqbavnaf, naq
sbe Purzbfu gur nobzvangvba bs gur Zbnovgrf, naq sbe Zvypbz gur
nobzvangvba bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba, qvq gur xvat qrsvyr.

23:14 Naq ur oenxr va cvrprf gur vzntrf, naq phg qbja gur tebirf, naq
svyyrq gurve cynprf jvgu gur obarf bs zra.

23:15 Zberbire gur nygne gung jnf ng Orgury, naq gur uvtu cynpr juvpu
Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong, jub znqr Vfenry gb fva, unq znqr, obgu gung
nygne naq gur uvtu cynpr ur oenxr qbja, naq ohearq gur uvtu cynpr, naq
fgnzcrq vg fznyy gb cbjqre, naq ohearq gur tebir.

23:16 Naq nf Wbfvnu ghearq uvzfrys, ur fcvrq gur frchypuerf gung jrer
gurer va gur zbhag, naq frag, naq gbbx gur obarf bhg bs gur
frchypuerf, naq ohearq gurz hcba gur nygne, naq cbyyhgrq vg, nppbeqvat
gb gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ juvpu gur zna bs Tbq cebpynvzrq, jub
cebpynvzrq gurfr jbeqf.

23:17 Gura ur fnvq, Jung gvgyr vf gung gung V frr? Naq gur zra bs gur
pvgl gbyq uvz, Vg vf gur frchypuer bs gur zna bs Tbq, juvpu pnzr sebz
Whqnu, naq cebpynvzrq gurfr guvatf gung gubh unfg qbar ntnvafg gur
nygne bs Orgury.

23:18 Naq ur fnvq, Yrg uvz nybar; yrg ab zna zbir uvf obarf. Fb gurl
yrg uvf obarf nybar, jvgu gur obarf bs gur cebcurg gung pnzr bhg bs
Fnznevn.

23:19 Naq nyy gur ubhfrf nyfb bs gur uvtu cynprf gung jrer va gur
pvgvrf bs Fnznevn, juvpu gur xvatf bs Vfenry unq znqr gb cebibxr gur
Ybeq gb natre, Wbfvnu gbbx njnl, naq qvq gb gurz nppbeqvat gb nyy gur
npgf gung ur unq qbar va Orgury.

23:20 Naq ur fyrj nyy gur cevrfgf bs gur uvtu cynprf gung jrer gurer
hcba gur nygnef, naq ohearq zra'f obarf hcba gurz, naq erghearq gb
Wrehfnyrz.

23:21 Naq gur xvat pbzznaqrq nyy gur crbcyr, fnlvat, Xrrc gur cnffbire
hagb gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, nf vg vf jevggra va gur obbx bs guvf pbiranag.

23:22 Fheryl gurer jnf abg ubyqra fhpu n cnffbire sebz gur qnlf bs gur
whqtrf gung whqtrq Vfenry, abe va nyy gur qnlf bs gur xvatf bs Vfenry,
abe bs gur xvatf bs Whqnu; 23:23 Ohg va gur rvtugrragu lrne bs xvat
Wbfvnu, jurerva guvf cnffbire jnf ubyqra gb gur YBEQ va Wrehfnyrz.

23:24 Zberbire gur jbexref jvgu snzvyvne fcvevgf, naq gur jvmneqf, naq
gur vzntrf, naq gur vqbyf, naq nyy gur nobzvangvbaf gung jrer fcvrq va
gur ynaq bs Whqnu naq va Wrehfnyrz, qvq Wbfvnu chg njnl, gung ur zvtug
cresbez gur jbeqf bs gur ynj juvpu jrer jevggra va gur obbx gung
Uvyxvnu gur cevrfg sbhaq va gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

23:25 Naq yvxr hagb uvz jnf gurer ab xvat orsber uvz, gung ghearq gb
gur YBEQ jvgu nyy uvf urneg, naq jvgu nyy uvf fbhy, naq jvgu nyy uvf
zvtug, nppbeqvat gb nyy gur ynj bs Zbfrf; arvgure nsgre uvz nebfr
gurer nal yvxr uvz.

23:26 Abgjvgufgnaqvat gur YBEQ ghearq abg sebz gur svreprarff bs uvf
terng jengu, jurerjvgu uvf natre jnf xvaqyrq ntnvafg Whqnu, orpnhfr bs
nyy gur cebibpngvbaf gung Znanffru unq cebibxrq uvz jvguny.

23:27 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq, V jvyy erzbir Whqnu nyfb bhg bs zl fvtug, nf
V unir erzbirq Vfenry, naq jvyy pnfg bss guvf pvgl Wrehfnyrz juvpu V
unir pubfra, naq gur ubhfr bs juvpu V fnvq, Zl anzr funyy or gurer.

23:28 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Wbfvnu, naq nyy gung ur qvq, ner
gurl abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Whqnu?
23:29 Va uvf qnlf Cunenbuarpubu xvat bs Rtlcg jrag hc ntnvafg gur xvat
bs Nfflevn gb gur evire Rhcuengrf: naq xvat Wbfvnu jrag ntnvafg uvz;
naq ur fyrj uvz ng Zrtvqqb, jura ur unq frra uvz.

23:30 Naq uvf freinagf pneevrq uvz va n punevbg qrnq sebz Zrtvqqb, naq
oebhtug uvz gb Wrehfnyrz, naq ohevrq uvz va uvf bja frchypuer. Naq gur
crbcyr bs gur ynaq gbbx Wrubnunm gur fba bs Wbfvnu, naq nabvagrq uvz,
naq znqr uvz xvat va uvf sngure'f fgrnq.

23:31 Wrubnunm jnf gjragl naq guerr lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta;
naq ur ervtarq guerr zbaguf va Wrehfnyrz. Naq uvf zbgure'f anzr jnf
Unzhgny, gur qnhtugre bs Wrerzvnu bs Yvoanu.

23:32 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ,
nppbeqvat gb nyy gung uvf snguref unq qbar.

23:33 Naq Cunenbuarpubu chg uvz va onaqf ng Evoynu va gur ynaq bs
Unzngu, gung ur zvtug abg ervta va Wrehfnyrz; naq chg gur ynaq gb n
gevohgr bs na uhaqerq gnyragf bs fvyire, naq n gnyrag bs tbyq.

23:34 Naq Cunenbuarpubu znqr Ryvnxvz gur fba bs Wbfvnu xvat va gur
ebbz bs Wbfvnu uvf sngure, naq ghearq uvf anzr gb Wrubvnxvz, naq gbbx
Wrubnunm njnl: naq ur pnzr gb Rtlcg, naq qvrq gurer.

23:35 Naq Wrubvnxvz tnir gur fvyire naq gur tbyq gb Cunenbu; ohg ur
gnkrq gur ynaq gb tvir gur zbarl nppbeqvat gb gur pbzznaqzrag bs
Cunenbu: ur rknpgrq gur fvyire naq gur tbyq bs gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq,
bs rirel bar nppbeqvat gb uvf gnkngvba, gb tvir vg hagb Cunenbuarpubu.

23:36 Wrubvnxvz jnf gjragl naq svir lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta;
naq ur ervtarq ryrira lrnef va Wrehfnyrz. Naq uvf zbgure'f anzr jnf
Mrohqnu, gur qnhtugre bs Crqnvnu bs Ehznu.

23:37 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ,
nppbeqvat gb nyy gung uvf snguref unq qbar.

24:1 Va uvf qnlf Arohpunqarmmne xvat bs Onolyba pnzr hc, naq Wrubvnxvz
orpnzr uvf freinag guerr lrnef: gura ur ghearq naq eroryyrq ntnvafg
uvz.

24:2 Naq gur YBEQ frag ntnvafg uvz onaqf bs gur Punyqrrf, naq onaqf bs
gur Flevnaf, naq onaqf bs gur Zbnovgrf, naq onaqf bs gur puvyqera bs
Nzzba, naq frag gurz ntnvafg Whqnu gb qrfgebl vg, nppbeqvat gb gur
jbeq bs gur YBEQ, juvpu ur fcnxr ol uvf freinagf gur cebcurgf.

24:3 Fheryl ng gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ pnzr guvf hcba Whqnu, gb
erzbir gurz bhg bs uvf fvtug, sbe gur fvaf bs Znanffru, nppbeqvat gb
nyy gung ur qvq; 24:4 Naq nyfb sbe gur vaabprag oybbq gung ur furq:
sbe ur svyyrq Wrehfnyrz jvgu vaabprag oybbq; juvpu gur YBEQ jbhyq abg
cneqba.

24:5 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Wrubvnxvz, naq nyy gung ur qvq, ner
gurl abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf bs Whqnu?
24:6 Fb Wrubvnxvz fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref: naq Wrubvnpuva uvf fba
ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

24:7 Naq gur xvat bs Rtlcg pnzr abg ntnva nal zber bhg bs uvf ynaq:
sbe gur xvat bs Onolyba unq gnxra sebz gur evire bs Rtlcg hagb gur
evire Rhcuengrf nyy gung cregnvarq gb gur xvat bs Rtlcg.

24:8 Wrubvnpuva jnf rvtugrra lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq ur
ervtarq va Wrehfnyrz guerr zbaguf. Naq uvf zbgure'f anzr jnf Aruhfugn,
gur qnhtugre bs Ryanguna bs Wrehfnyrz.

24:9 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ,
nppbeqvat gb nyy gung uvf sngure unq qbar.

24:10 Ng gung gvzr gur freinagf bs Arohpunqarmmne xvat bs Onolyba pnzr
hc ntnvafg Wrehfnyrz, naq gur pvgl jnf orfvrtrq.

24:11 Naq Arohpunqarmmne xvat bs Onolyba pnzr ntnvafg gur pvgl, naq
uvf freinagf qvq orfvrtr vg.

24:12 Naq Wrubvnpuva gur xvat bs Whqnu jrag bhg gb gur xvat bs
Onolyba, ur, naq uvf zbgure, naq uvf freinagf, naq uvf cevaprf, naq
uvf bssvpref: naq gur xvat bs Onolyba gbbx uvz va gur rvtugu lrne bs
uvf ervta.

24:13 Naq ur pneevrq bhg gurapr nyy gur gernfherf bs gur ubhfr bs gur
YBEQ, naq gur gernfherf bs gur xvat'f ubhfr, naq phg va cvrprf nyy gur
irffryf bs tbyq juvpu Fbybzba xvat bs Vfenry unq znqr va gur grzcyr bs
gur YBEQ, nf gur YBEQ unq fnvq.

24:14 Naq ur pneevrq njnl nyy Wrehfnyrz, naq nyy gur cevaprf, naq nyy
gur zvtugl zra bs inybhe, rira gra gubhfnaq pncgvirf, naq nyy gur
pensgfzra naq fzvguf: abar erznvarq, fnir gur cbberfg fbeg bs gur
crbcyr bs gur ynaq.

24:15 Naq ur pneevrq njnl Wrubvnpuva gb Onolyba, naq gur xvat'f
zbgure, naq gur xvat'f jvirf, naq uvf bssvpref, naq gur zvtugl bs gur
ynaq, gubfr pneevrq ur vagb pncgvivgl sebz Wrehfnyrz gb Onolyba.

24:16 Naq nyy gur zra bs zvtug, rira frira gubhfnaq, naq pensgfzra naq
fzvguf n gubhfnaq, nyy gung jrer fgebat naq ncg sbe jne, rira gurz gur
xvat bs Onolyba oebhtug pncgvir gb Onolyba.

24:17 Naq gur xvat bs Onolyba znqr Znggnavnu uvf sngure'f oebgure xvat
va uvf fgrnq, naq punatrq uvf anzr gb Mrqrxvnu.

24:18 Mrqrxvnu jnf gjragl naq bar lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta,
naq ur ervtarq ryrira lrnef va Wrehfnyrz. Naq uvf zbgure'f anzr jnf
Unzhgny, gur qnhtugre bs Wrerzvnu bs Yvoanu.

24:19 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ,
nppbeqvat gb nyy gung Wrubvnxvz unq qbar.

24:20 Sbe guebhtu gur natre bs gur YBEQ vg pnzr gb cnff va Wrehfnyrz
naq Whqnu, hagvy ur unq pnfg gurz bhg sebz uvf cerfrapr, gung Mrqrxvnu
eroryyrq ntnvafg gur xvat bs Onolyba.

25:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gur avagu lrne bs uvf ervta, va gur gragu
zbagu, va gur gragu qnl bs gur zbagu, gung Arohpunqarmmne xvat bs
Onolyba pnzr, ur, naq nyy uvf ubfg, ntnvafg Wrehfnyrz, naq cvgpurq
ntnvafg vg; naq gurl ohvyg sbegf ntnvafg vg ebhaq nobhg.

25:2 Naq gur pvgl jnf orfvrtrq hagb gur ryriragu lrne bs xvat
Mrqrxvnu.

25:3 Naq ba gur avagu qnl bs gur sbhegu zbagu gur snzvar cerinvyrq va
gur pvgl, naq gurer jnf ab oernq sbe gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq.

25:4 Naq gur pvgl jnf oebxra hc, naq nyy gur zra bs jne syrq ol avtug
ol gur jnl bs gur tngr orgjrra gjb jnyyf, juvpu vf ol gur xvat'f
tneqra: (abj gur Punyqrrf jrer ntnvafg gur pvgl ebhaq nobhg:) naq gur
xvat jrag gur jnl gbjneq gur cynva.

25:5 Naq gur nezl bs gur Punyqrrf chefhrq nsgre gur xvat, naq biregbbx
uvz va gur cynvaf bs Wrevpub: naq nyy uvf nezl jrer fpnggrerq sebz
uvz.

25:6 Fb gurl gbbx gur xvat, naq oebhtug uvz hc gb gur xvat bs Onolyba
gb Evoynu; naq gurl tnir whqtzrag hcba uvz.

25:7 Naq gurl fyrj gur fbaf bs Mrqrxvnu orsber uvf rlrf, naq chg bhg
gur rlrf bs Mrqrxvnu, naq obhaq uvz jvgu srggref bs oenff, naq pneevrq
uvz gb Onolyba.

25:8 Naq va gur svsgu zbagu, ba gur friragu qnl bs gur zbagu, juvpu vf
gur avargrragu lrne bs xvat Arohpunqarmmne xvat bs Onolyba, pnzr
Arohmnenqna, pncgnva bs gur thneq, n freinag bs gur xvat bs Onolyba,
hagb Wrehfnyrz: 25:9 Naq ur oheag gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq gur
xvat'f ubhfr, naq nyy gur ubhfrf bs Wrehfnyrz, naq rirel terng zna'f
ubhfr oheag ur jvgu sver.

25:10 Naq nyy gur nezl bs gur Punyqrrf, gung jrer jvgu gur pncgnva bs
gur thneq, oenxr qbja gur jnyyf bs Wrehfnyrz ebhaq nobhg.

25:11 Abj gur erfg bs gur crbcyr gung jrer yrsg va gur pvgl, naq gur
shtvgvirf gung sryy njnl gb gur xvat bs Onolyba, jvgu gur erzanag bs
gur zhygvghqr, qvq Arohmnenqna gur pncgnva bs gur thneq pneel njnl.

25:12 Ohg gur pncgnva bs gur thneq yrsg bs gur qbbe bs gur cbbe bs gur
ynaq gb or ivarqerffref naq uhfonaqzra.

25:13 Naq gur cvyynef bs oenff gung jrer va gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq
gur onfrf, naq gur oenfra frn gung jnf va gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, qvq
gur Punyqrrf oernx va cvrprf, naq pneevrq gur oenff bs gurz gb
Onolyba.

25:14 Naq gur cbgf, naq gur fubiryf, naq gur fahssref, naq gur fcbbaf,
naq nyy gur irffryf bs oenff jurerjvgu gurl zvavfgrerq, gbbx gurl
njnl.

25:15 Naq gur svercnaf, naq gur objyf, naq fhpu guvatf nf jrer bs
tbyq, va tbyq, naq bs fvyire, va fvyire, gur pncgnva bs gur thneq gbbx
njnl.

25:16 Gur gjb cvyynef, bar frn, naq gur onfrf juvpu Fbybzba unq znqr
sbe gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ; gur oenff bs nyy gurfr irffryf jnf jvgubhg
jrvtug.

25:17 Gur urvtug bs gur bar cvyyne jnf rvtugrra phovgf, naq gur
puncvgre hcba vg jnf oenff: naq gur urvtug bs gur puncvgre guerr
phovgf; naq gur jerngura jbex, naq cbzrtenangrf hcba gur puncvgre
ebhaq nobhg, nyy bs oenff: naq yvxr hagb gurfr unq gur frpbaq cvyyne
jvgu jerngura jbex.

25:18 Naq gur pncgnva bs gur thneq gbbx Frenvnu gur puvrs cevrfg, naq
Mrcunavnu gur frpbaq cevrfg, naq gur guerr xrrcref bs gur qbbe: 25:19
Naq bhg bs gur pvgl ur gbbx na bssvpre gung jnf frg bire gur zra bs
jne, naq svir zra bs gurz gung jrer va gur xvat'f cerfrapr, juvpu jrer
sbhaq va gur pvgl, naq gur cevapvcny fpevor bs gur ubfg, juvpu
zhfgrerq gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq, naq guerrfpber zra bs gur crbcyr bs
gur ynaq gung jrer sbhaq va gur pvgl: 25:20 Naq Arohmnenqna pncgnva bs
gur thneq gbbx gurfr, naq oebhtug gurz gb gur xvat bs Onolyba gb
Evoynu: 25:21 Naq gur xvat bs Onolyba fzbgr gurz, naq fyrj gurz ng
Evoynu va gur ynaq bs Unzngu. Fb Whqnu jnf pneevrq njnl bhg bs gurve
ynaq.

25:22 Naq nf sbe gur crbcyr gung erznvarq va gur ynaq bs Whqnu, jubz
Arohpunqarmmne xvat bs Onolyba unq yrsg, rira bire gurz ur znqr
Trqnyvnu gur fba bs Nuvxnz, gur fba bs Funcuna, ehyre.

25:23 Naq jura nyy gur pncgnvaf bs gur nezvrf, gurl naq gurve zra,
urneq gung gur xvat bs Onolyba unq znqr Trqnyvnu tbireabe, gurer pnzr
gb Trqnyvnu gb Zvmcnu, rira Vfuznry gur fba bs Argunavnu, naq Wbunana
gur fba bs Pnernu, naq Frenvnu gur fba bs Gnauhzrgu gur Argbcunguvgr,
naq Wnnmnavnu gur fba bs n Znnpunguvgr, gurl naq gurve zra.

25:24 Naq Trqnyvnu fjner gb gurz, naq gb gurve zra, naq fnvq hagb
gurz, Srne abg gb or gur freinagf bs gur Punyqrrf: qjryy va gur ynaq,
naq freir gur xvat bs Onolyba; naq vg funyy or jryy jvgu lbh.

25:25 Ohg vg pnzr gb cnff va gur friragu zbagu, gung Vfuznry gur fba
bs Argunavnu, gur fba bs Ryvfunzn, bs gur frrq eblny, pnzr, naq gra
zra jvgu uvz, naq fzbgr Trqnyvnu, gung ur qvrq, naq gur Wrjf naq gur
Punyqrrf gung jrer jvgu uvz ng Zvmcnu.

25:26 Naq nyy gur crbcyr, obgu fznyy naq terng, naq gur pncgnvaf bs
gur nezvrf, nebfr, naq pnzr gb Rtlcg: sbe gurl jrer nsenvq bs gur
Punyqrrf.

25:27 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gur frira naq guvegvrgu lrne bs gur
pncgvivgl bs Wrubvnpuva xvat bs Whqnu, va gur gjrysgu zbagu, ba gur
frira naq gjragvrgu qnl bs gur zbagu, gung Rivyzrebqnpu xvat bs
Onolyba va gur lrne gung ur ortna gb ervta qvq yvsg hc gur urnq bs
Wrubvnpuva xvat bs Whqnu bhg bs cevfba; 25:28 Naq ur fcnxr xvaqyl gb
uvz, naq frg uvf guebar nobir gur guebar bs gur xvatf gung jrer jvgu
uvz va Onolyba; 25:29 Naq punatrq uvf cevfba tnezragf: naq ur qvq rng
oernq pbagvahnyyl orsber uvz nyy gur qnlf bs uvf yvsr.

25:30 Naq uvf nyybjnapr jnf n pbagvahny nyybjnapr tvira uvz bs gur
xvat, n qnvyl engr sbe rirel qnl, nyy gur qnlf bs uvf yvsr.




Gur Svefg Obbx bs gur Puebavpyrf


1:1 Nqnz, Furgu, Rabfu, 1:2 Xrana, Znunynyrry, Wrerq, 1:3 Urabpu,
Zrguhfrynu, Ynzrpu, 1:4 Abnu, Furz, Unz, naq Wncurgu.

1:5 Gur fbaf bs Wncurgu; Tbzre, naq Zntbt, naq Znqnv, naq Wnina, naq
Ghony, naq Zrfurpu, naq Gvenf.

1:6 Naq gur fbaf bs Tbzre; Nfupuranm, naq Evcungu, naq Gbtneznu.

1:7 Naq gur fbaf bs Wnina; Ryvfunu, naq Gnefuvfu, Xvggvz, naq Qbqnavz.

1:8 Gur fbaf bs Unz; Phfu, naq Zvmenvz, Chg, naq Pnanna.

1:9 Naq gur fbaf bs Phfu; Fron, naq Univynu, naq Fnogn, naq Ennznu,
naq Fnogrpun. Naq gur fbaf bs Ennznu; Furon, naq Qrqna.

1:10 Naq Phfu ortng Avzebq: ur ortna gb or zvtugl hcba gur rnegu.

1:11 Naq Zvmenvz ortng Yhqvz, naq Nanzvz, naq Yrunovz, naq Ancughuvz,
1:12 Naq Cnguehfvz, naq Pnfyhuvz, (bs jubz pnzr gur Cuvyvfgvarf,) naq
Pncugubevz.

1:13 Naq Pnanna ortng Mvqba uvf svefgobea, naq Urgu, 1:14 Gur Wrohfvgr
nyfb, naq gur Nzbevgr, naq gur Tvetnfuvgr, 1:15 Naq gur Uvivgr, naq
gur Nexvgr, naq gur Fvavgr, 1:16 Naq gur Neinqvgr, naq gur Mrznevgr,
naq gur Unznguvgr.

1:17 Gur fbaf bs Furz; Rynz, naq Nffuhe, naq Necunknq, naq Yhq, naq
Nenz, naq Hm, naq Uhy, naq Trgure, naq Zrfurpu.

1:18 Naq Necunknq ortng Furynu, naq Furynu ortng Rore.

1:19 Naq hagb Rore jrer obea gjb fbaf: gur anzr bs gur bar jnf Cryrt;
orpnhfr va uvf qnlf gur rnegu jnf qvivqrq: naq uvf oebgure'f anzr jnf
Wbxgna.

1:20 Naq Wbxgna ortng Nyzbqnq, naq Furyrcu, naq Unmneznirgu, naq
Wrenu, 1:21 Unqbenz nyfb, naq Hmny, naq Qvxynu, 1:22 Naq Rony, naq
Novznry, naq Furon, 1:23 Naq Bcuve, naq Univynu, naq Wbono. Nyy gurfr
jrer gur fbaf bs Wbxgna.

1:24 Furz, Necunknq, Furynu, 1:25 Rore, Cryrt, Erh, 1:26 Freht, Anube,
Grenu, 1:27 Noenz; gur fnzr vf Noenunz.

1:28 Gur fbaf bs Noenunz; Vfnnp, naq Vfuznry.

1:29 Gurfr ner gurve trarengvbaf: Gur svefgobea bs Vfuznry, Aronvbgu;
gura Xrqne, naq Nqorry, naq Zvofnz, 1:30 Zvfuzn, naq Qhznu, Znffn,
Unqnq, naq Grzn, 1:31 Wrghe, Ancuvfu, naq Xrqrznu. Gurfr ner gur fbaf
bs Vfuznry.

1:32 Abj gur fbaf bs Xrghenu, Noenunz'f pbaphovar: fur oner Mvzena,
naq Wbxfuna, naq Zrqna, naq Zvqvna, naq Vfuonx, naq Fuhnu. Naq gur
fbaf bs Wbxfuna; Furon, naq Qrqna.

1:33 Naq gur fbaf bs Zvqvna; Rcunu, naq Rcure, naq Urabpu, naq Novqn,
naq Ryqnnu. Nyy gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Xrghenu.

1:34 Naq Noenunz ortng Vfnnp. Gur fbaf bs Vfnnp; Rfnh naq Vfenry.

1:35 Gur fbaf bs Rfnh; Ryvcunm, Erhry, naq Wrhfu, naq Wnnynz, naq
Xbenu.

1:36 Gur fbaf bs Ryvcunm; Grzna, naq Bzne, Mrcuv, naq Tngnz, Xranm,
naq Gvzan, naq Nznyrx.

1:37 Gur fbaf bs Erhry; Anungu, Mrenu, Funzznu, naq Zvmmnu.

1:38 Naq gur fbaf bs Frve; Ybgna, naq Fubony, naq Mvorba, naq Nanu,
naq Qvfuba, naq Rmne, naq Qvfuna.

1:39 Naq gur fbaf bs Ybgna; Ubev, naq Ubznz: naq Gvzan jnf Ybgna'f
fvfgre.

1:40 Gur fbaf bs Fubony; Nyvna, naq Znanungu, naq Rony, Furcuv, naq
Banz.

naq gur fbaf bs Mvorba; Nvnu, naq Nanu.

1:41 Gur fbaf bs Nanu; Qvfuba. Naq gur fbaf bs Qvfuba; Nzenz, naq
Rfuona, naq Vguena, naq Purena.

1:42 Gur fbaf bs Rmre; Ovyuna, naq Mnina, naq Wnxna. Gur fbaf bs
Qvfuna; Hm, naq Nena.

1:43 Abj gurfr ner gur xvatf gung ervtarq va gur ynaq bs Rqbz orsber
nal xvat ervtarq bire gur puvyqera bs Vfenry; Oryn gur fba bs Orbe:
naq gur anzr bs uvf pvgl jnf Qvaunonu.

1:44 Naq jura Oryn jnf qrnq, Wbono gur fba bs Mrenu bs Obmenu ervtarq
va uvf fgrnq.

1:45 Naq jura Wbono jnf qrnq, Uhfunz bs gur ynaq bs gur Grznavgrf
ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

1:46 Naq jura Uhfunz jnf qrnq, Unqnq gur fba bs Orqnq, juvpu fzbgr
Zvqvna va gur svryq bs Zbno, ervtarq va uvf fgrnq: naq gur anzr bs uvf
pvgl jnf Nivgu.

1:47 Naq jura Unqnq jnf qrnq, Fnzynu bs Znferxnu ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

1:48 Naq jura Fnzynu jnf qrnq, Funhy bs Erubobgu ol gur evire ervtarq
va uvf fgrnq.

1:49 Naq jura Funhy jnf qrnq, Onnyunana gur fba bs Npuobe ervtarq va
uvf fgrnq.

1:50 Naq jura Onnyunana jnf qrnq, Unqnq ervtarq va uvf fgrnq: naq gur
anzr bs uvf pvgl jnf Cnv; naq uvf jvsr'f anzr jnf Zrurgnory, gur
qnhtugre bs Zngerq, gur qnhtugre bs Zrmnuno.

1:51 Unqnq qvrq nyfb. Naq gur qhxrf bs Rqbz jrer; qhxr Gvzanu, qhxr
Nyvnu, qhxr Wrgurgu, 1:52 Qhxr Nubyvonznu, qhxr Rynu, qhxr Cvaba, 1:53
Qhxr Xranm, qhxr Grzna, qhxr Zvomne, 1:54 Qhxr Zntqvry, qhxr Venz.
Gurfr ner gur qhxrf bs Rqbz.

2:1 Gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Vfenry; Erhora, Fvzrba, Yriv, naq Whqnu,
Vffnpune, naq Mrohyha, 2:2 Qna, Wbfrcu, naq Orawnzva, Ancugnyv, Tnq,
naq Nfure.

2:3 Gur fbaf bs Whqnu; Re, naq Bana, naq Furynu: juvpu guerr jrer obea
hagb uvz bs gur qnhtugre bs Fuhn gur Pnannavgrff. Naq Re, gur
svefgobea bs Whqnu, jnf rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ; naq ur fyrj
uvz.

2:4 Naq Gnzne uvf qnhtugre va ynj ober uvz Cunerm naq Mrenu. Nyy gur
fbaf bs Whqnu jrer svir.

2:5 Gur fbaf bs Cunerm; Urmeba, naq Unzhy.

2:6 Naq gur fbaf bs Mrenu; Mvzev, naq Rguna, naq Urzna, naq Pnypby,
naq Qnen: svir bs gurz va nyy.

2:7 Naq gur fbaf bs Pnezv; Npune, gur gebhoyre bs Vfenry, jub
genafterffrq va gur guvat npphefrq.

2:8 Naq gur fbaf bs Rguna; Nmnevnu.

2:9 Gur fbaf nyfb bs Urmeba, gung jrer obea hagb uvz; Wrenuzrry, naq
Enz, naq Puryhonv.

2:10 Naq Enz ortng Nzzvanqno; naq Nzzvanqno ortng Anufuba, cevapr bs
gur puvyqera bs Whqnu; 2:11 Naq Anufuba ortng Fnyzn, naq Fnyzn ortng
Obnm, 2:12 Naq Obnm ortng Borq, naq Borq ortng Wrffr, 2:13 Naq Wrffr
ortng uvf svefgobea Ryvno, naq Novanqno gur frpbaq, naq Fuvzzn gur
guveq, 2:14 Argunarry gur sbhegu, Enqqnv gur svsgu, 2:15 Bmrz gur
fvkgu, Qnivq gur friragu: 2:16 Jubfr fvfgref jrer Mrehvnu, naq
Novtnvy. Naq gur fbaf bs Mrehvnu; Novfunv, naq Wbno, naq Nfnury,
guerr.

2:17 Naq Novtnvy oner Nznfn: naq gur sngure bs Nznfn jnf Wrgure gur
Vfuzrryvgr.

2:18 Naq Pnyro gur fba bs Urmeba ortng puvyqera bs Nmhonu uvf jvsr,
naq bs Wrevbgu: ure fbaf ner gurfr; Wrfure, naq Fubono, naq Neqba.

2:19 Naq jura Nmhonu jnf qrnq, Pnyro gbbx hagb uvz Rcuengu, juvpu oner
uvz Uhe.

2:20 Naq Uhe ortng Hev, naq Hev ortng Ormnyrry.

2:21 Naq nsgrejneq Urmeba jrag va gb gur qnhtugre bs Znpuve gur sngure
bs Tvyrnq, jubz ur zneevrq jura ur jnf guerrfpber lrnef byq; naq fur
oner uvz Frtho.

2:22 Naq Frtho ortng Wnve, jub unq guerr naq gjragl pvgvrf va gur ynaq
bs Tvyrnq.

2:23 Naq ur gbbx Trfuhe, naq Nenz, jvgu gur gbjaf bs Wnve, sebz gurz,
jvgu Xrangu, naq gur gbjaf gurerbs, rira guerrfpber pvgvrf. Nyy gurfr
orybatrq gb gur fbaf bs Znpuve gur sngure bs Tvyrnq.

2:24 Naq nsgre gung Urmeba jnf qrnq va Pnyrorcuengnu, gura Novnu
Urmeba'f jvsr oner uvz Nfuhe gur sngure bs Grxbn.

2:25 Naq gur fbaf bs Wrenuzrry gur svefgobea bs Urmeba jrer, Enz gur
svefgobea, naq Ohanu, naq Bera, naq Bmrz, naq Nuvwnu.

2:26 Wrenuzrry unq nyfb nabgure jvsr, jubfr anzr jnf Ngnenu; fur jnf
gur zbgure bs Banz.

2:27 Naq gur fbaf bs Enz gur svefgobea bs Wrenuzrry jrer, Znnm, naq
Wnzva, naq Rxre.

2:28 Naq gur fbaf bs Banz jrer, Funzznv, naq Wnqn. Naq gur fbaf bs
Funzznv; Anqno naq Novfuhe.

2:29 Naq gur anzr bs gur jvsr bs Novfuhe jnf Novunvy, naq fur oner uvz
Nuona, naq Zbyvq.

2:30 Naq gur fbaf bs Anqno; Fryrq, naq Nccnvz: ohg Fryrq qvrq jvgubhg
puvyqera.

2:31 Naq gur fbaf bs Nccnvz; Vfuv. Naq gur fbaf bs Vfuv; Furfuna. Naq
gur puvyqera bs Furfuna; Nuynv.

2:32 Naq gur fbaf bs Wnqn gur oebgure bs Funzznv; Wrgure, naq
Wbanguna: naq Wrgure qvrq jvgubhg puvyqera.

2:33 Naq gur fbaf bs Wbanguna; Cryrgu, naq Mnmn. Gurfr jrer gur fbaf
bs Wrenuzrry.

2:34 Abj Furfuna unq ab fbaf, ohg qnhtugref. Naq Furfuna unq n
freinag, na Rtlcgvna, jubfr anzr jnf Wneun.

2:35 Naq Furfuna tnir uvf qnhtugre gb Wneun uvf freinag gb jvsr; naq
fur oner uvz Nggnv.

2:36 Naq Nggnv ortng Anguna, naq Anguna ortng Mnonq, 2:37 Naq Mnonq
ortng Rcuyny, naq Rcuyny ortng Borq, 2:38 Naq Borq ortng Wruh, naq
Wruh ortng Nmnevnu, 2:39 Naq Nmnevnu ortng Uryrm, naq Uryrm ortng
Ryrnfnu, 2:40 Naq Ryrnfnu ortng Fvfnznv, naq Fvfnznv ortng Funyyhz,
2:41 Naq Funyyhz ortng Wrxnzvnu, naq Wrxnzvnu ortng Ryvfunzn.

2:42 Abj gur fbaf bs Pnyro gur oebgure bs Wrenuzrry jrer, Zrfun uvf
svefgobea, juvpu jnf gur sngure bs Mvcu; naq gur fbaf bs Znerfunu gur
sngure bs Uroeba.

2:43 Naq gur fbaf bs Uroeba; Xbenu, naq Gncchnu, naq Erxrz, naq Furzn.

2:44 Naq Furzn ortng Enunz, gur sngure bs Wbexbnz: naq Erxrz ortng
Funzznv.

2:45 Naq gur fba bs Funzznv jnf Znba: naq Znba jnf gur sngure bs
Orgumhe.

2:46 Naq Rcunu, Pnyro'f pbaphovar, oner Unena, naq Zbmn, naq Tnmrm:
naq Unena ortng Tnmrm.

2:47 Naq gur fbaf bs Wnuqnv; Ertrz, naq Wbgunz, naq Trfunz, naq Cryrg,
naq Rcunu, naq Funncu.

2:48 Znnpunu, Pnyro'f pbaphovar, oner Furore, naq Gveunanu.

2:49 Fur oner nyfb Funncu gur sngure bs Znqznaanu, Furin gur sngure bs
Znpuoranu, naq gur sngure bs Tvorn: naq gur qnhtugre bs Pnyro jnf
Npufn.

2:50 Gurfr jrer gur fbaf bs Pnyro gur fba bs Uhe, gur svefgobea bs
Rcuengnu; Fubony gur sngure bs Xvewnguwrnevz.

2:51 Fnyzn gur sngure bs Orguyrurz, Unercu gur sngure bs Orgutnqre.

2:52 Naq Fubony gur sngure bs Xvewnguwrnevz unq fbaf; Unebru, naq unys
bs gur Znanurguvgrf.

2:53 Naq gur snzvyvrf bs Xvewnguwrnevz; gur Vguevgrf, naq gur Chuvgrf,
naq gur Fuhznguvgrf, naq gur Zvfuenvgrf; bs gurz pnzr gur Mnernguvgrf,
naq gur Rfugnhyvgrf, 2:54 Gur fbaf bs Fnyzn; Orguyrurz, naq gur
Argbcunguvgrf, Ngnebgu, gur ubhfr bs Wbno, naq unys bs gur
Znanurguvgrf, gur Mbevgrf.

2:55 Naq gur snzvyvrf bs gur fpevorf juvpu qjryg ng Wnorm; gur
Gvenguvgrf, gur Fuvzrnguvgrf, naq Fhpunguvgrf. Gurfr ner gur Xravgrf
gung pnzr bs Urzngu, gur sngure bs gur ubhfr bs Erpuno.

3:1 Abj gurfr jrer gur fbaf bs Qnivq, juvpu jrer obea hagb uvz va
Uroeba; gur svefgobea Nzaba, bs Nuvabnz gur Wrmerryvgrff; gur frpbaq
Qnavry, bs Novtnvy gur Pnezryvgrff: 3:2 Gur guveq, Nofnybz gur fba bs
Znnpunu gur qnhtugre bs Gnyznv xvat bs Trfuhe: gur sbhegu, Nqbavwnu
gur fba bs Unttvgu: 3:3 Gur svsgu, Furcungvnu bs Novgny: gur fvkgu,
Vguernz ol Rtynu uvf jvsr.

3:4 Gurfr fvk jrer obea hagb uvz va Uroeba; naq gurer ur ervtarq frira
lrnef naq fvk zbaguf: naq va Wrehfnyrz ur ervtarq guvegl naq guerr
lrnef.

3:5 Naq gurfr jrer obea hagb uvz va Wrehfnyrz; Fuvzrn, naq Fubono, naq
Anguna, naq Fbybzba, sbhe, bs Ongufuhn gur qnhtugre bs Nzzvry: 3:6
Voune nyfb, naq Ryvfunzn, naq Ryvcuryrg, 3:7 Naq Abtnu, naq Arcurt,
naq Wncuvn, 3:8 Naq Ryvfunzn, naq Ryvnqn, naq Ryvcuryrg, avar.

3:9 Gurfr jrer nyy gur fbaf bs Qnivq, orfvqr gur fbaf bs gur
pbaphovarf, naq Gnzne gurve fvfgre.

3:10 Naq Fbybzba'f fba jnf Erubobnz, Novn uvf fba, Nfn uvf fba,
Wrubfuncung uvf fba, 3:11 Wbenz uvf fba, Nunmvnu uvf fba, Wbnfu uvf
fba, 3:12 Nznmvnu uvf fba, Nmnevnu uvf fba, Wbgunz uvf fba, 3:13 Nunm
uvf fba, Urmrxvnu uvf fba, Znanffru uvf fba, 3:14 Nzba uvf fba, Wbfvnu
uvf fba.

3:15 Naq gur fbaf bs Wbfvnu jrer, gur svefgobea Wbunana, gur frpbaq
Wrubvnxvz, gur guveq Mrqrxvnu, gur sbhegu Funyyhz.

3:16 Naq gur fbaf bs Wrubvnxvz: Wrpbavnu uvf fba, Mrqrxvnu uvf fba.

3:17 Naq gur fbaf bs Wrpbavnu; Nffve, Fnynguvry uvf fba, 3:18
Znypuvenz nyfb, naq Crqnvnu, naq Furanmne, Wrpnzvnu, Ubfunzn, naq
Arqnovnu.

3:19 Naq gur fbaf bs Crqnvnu jrer, Mrehoonory, naq Fuvzrv: naq gur
fbaf bs Mrehoonory; Zrfuhyynz, naq Unanavnu, naq Furybzvgu gurve
fvfgre: 3:20 Naq Unfuhonu, naq Bury, naq Orerpuvnu, naq Unfnqvnu,
Whfunourfrq, svir.

3:21 Naq gur fbaf bs Unanavnu; Cryngvnu, naq Wrfnvnu: gur fbaf bs
Ercunvnu, gur fbaf bs Neana, gur fbaf bs Bonqvnu, gur fbaf bs
Furpunavnu.

3:22 Naq gur fbaf bs Furpunavnu; Furznvnu: naq gur fbaf bs Furznvnu;
Ungghfu, naq Vtrny, naq Onevnu, naq Arnevnu, naq Funcung, fvk.

3:23 Naq gur fbaf bs Arnevnu; Ryvbranv, naq Urmrxvnu, naq Nmevxnz,
guerr.

3:24 Naq gur fbaf bs Ryvbranv jrer, Ubqnvnu, naq Ryvnfuvo, naq
Crynvnu, naq Nxxho, naq Wbunana, naq Qnynvnu, naq Nanav, frira.

4:1 Gur fbaf bs Whqnu; Cunerm, Urmeba, naq Pnezv, naq Uhe, naq Fubony.

4:2 Naq Ernvnu gur fba bs Fubony ortng Wnungu; naq Wnungu ortng
Nuhznv, naq Ynunq. Gurfr ner gur snzvyvrf bs gur Mbenguvgrf.

4:3 Naq gurfr jrer bs gur sngure bs Rgnz; Wrmerry, naq Vfuzn, naq
Vqonfu: naq gur anzr bs gurve fvfgre jnf Unmryrycbav: 4:4 Naq Crahry
gur sngure bs Trqbe, naq Rmre gur sngure bs Uhfunu. Gurfr ner gur fbaf
bs Uhe, gur svefgobea bs Rcuengnu, gur sngure bs Orguyrurz.

4:5 Naq Nfuhe gur sngure bs Grxbn unq gjb jvirf, Urynu naq Annenu.

4:6 Naq Annenu oner uvz Nuhmnz, naq Urcure, naq Grzrav, naq
Unnunfugnev.

Gurfr jrer gur fbaf bs Annenu.

4:7 Naq gur fbaf bs Urynu jrer, Mrergu, naq Wrmbne, naq Rguana.

4:8 Naq Pbm ortng Naho, naq Mboronu, naq gur snzvyvrf bs Nuneury gur
fba bs Unehz.

4:9 Naq Wnorm jnf zber ubabhenoyr guna uvf oerguera: naq uvf zbgure
pnyyrq uvf anzr Wnorm, fnlvat, Orpnhfr V oner uvz jvgu fbeebj.

4:10 Naq Wnorm pnyyrq ba gur Tbq bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Bu gung gubh
jbhyqrfg oyrff zr vaqrrq, naq raynetr zl pbnfg, naq gung guvar unaq
zvtug or jvgu zr, naq gung gubh jbhyqrfg xrrc zr sebz rivy, gung vg
znl abg tevrir zr! Naq Tbq tenagrq uvz gung juvpu ur erdhrfgrq.

4:11 Naq Puryho gur oebgure bs Fuhnu ortng Zruve, juvpu jnf gur sngure
bs Rfugba.

4:12 Naq Rfugba ortng Orguencun, naq Cnfrnu, naq Gruvaanu gur sngure
bs Veanunfu. Gurfr ner gur zra bs Erpunu.

4:13 Naq gur fbaf bs Xranm; Bguavry, naq Frenvnu: naq gur fbaf bs
Bguavry; Ungungu.

4:14 Naq Zrbabgunv ortng Bcuenu: naq Frenvnu ortng Wbno, gur sngure bs
gur inyyrl bs Punenfuvz; sbe gurl jrer pensgfzra.

4:15 Naq gur fbaf bs Pnyro gur fba bs Wrcuhaaru; Veh, Rynu, naq Annz:
naq gur fbaf bs Rynu, rira Xranm.

4:16 Naq gur fbaf bs Wrunyryrry; Mvcu, naq Mvcunu, Gvevn, naq Nfnerry.

4:17 Naq gur fbaf bs Rmen jrer, Wrgure, naq Zrerq, naq Rcure, naq
Wnyba: naq fur oner Zvevnz, naq Funzznv, naq Vfuonu gur sngure bs
Rfugrzbn.

4:18 Naq uvf jvsr Wruhqvwnu oner Wrerq gur sngure bs Trqbe, naq Urore
gur sngure bs Fbpub, naq Wrxhguvry gur sngure bs Mnabnu. Naq gurfr ner
gur fbaf bs Ovguvnu gur qnhtugre bs Cunenbu, juvpu Zrerq gbbx.

4:19 Naq gur fbaf bs uvf jvsr Ubqvnu gur fvfgre bs Anunz, gur sngure
bs Xrvynu gur Tnezvgr, naq Rfugrzbn gur Znnpunguvgr.

4:20 Naq gur fbaf bs Fuvzba jrer, Nzaba, naq Evaanu, Oraunana, naq
Gvyba.

Naq gur fbaf bs Vfuv jrer, Mburgu, naq Oramburgu.

4:21 Gur fbaf bs Furynu gur fba bs Whqnu jrer, Re gur sngure bs Yrpnu,
naq Ynnqnu gur sngure bs Znerfunu, naq gur snzvyvrf bs gur ubhfr bs
gurz gung jebhtug svar yvara, bs gur ubhfr bs Nfuorn, 4:22 Naq Wbxvz,
naq gur zra bs Pubmron, naq Wbnfu, naq Fnencu, jub unq gur qbzvavba va
Zbno, naq Wnfuhovyrurz. Naq gurfr ner napvrag guvatf.

4:23 Gurfr jrer gur cbggref, naq gubfr gung qjryg nzbat cynagf naq
urqtrf: gurer gurl qjryg jvgu gur xvat sbe uvf jbex.

4:24 Gur fbaf bs Fvzrba jrer, Arzhry, naq Wnzva, Wnevo, Mrenu, naq
Funhy: 4:25 Funyyhz uvf fba, Zvofnz uvf fba, Zvfuzn uvf fba.

4:26 Naq gur fbaf bs Zvfuzn; Unzhry uvf fba, Mnppuhe uvf fba, Fuvzrv
uvf fba.

4:27 Naq Fuvzrv unq fvkgrra fbaf naq fvk qnhtugref: ohg uvf oerguera
unq abg znal puvyqera, arvgure qvq nyy gurve snzvyl zhygvcyl, yvxr gb
gur puvyqera bs Whqnu.

4:28 Naq gurl qjryg ng Orrefuron, naq Zbynqnu, naq Unmnefuhny, 4:29
Naq ng Ovyunu, naq ng Rmrz, naq ng Gbynq, 4:30 Naq ng Orguhry, naq ng
Ubeznu, naq ng Mvxynt, 4:31 Naq ng Orguznepnobgu, naq Unmnefhfvz, naq
ng Orguoverv, naq ng Funnenvz. Gurfr jrer gurve pvgvrf hagb gur ervta
bs Qnivq.

4:32 Naq gurve ivyyntrf jrer, Rgnz, naq Nva, Evzzba, naq Gbpura, naq
Nfuna, svir pvgvrf: 4:33 Naq nyy gurve ivyyntrf gung jrer ebhaq nobhg
gur fnzr pvgvrf, hagb Onny. Gurfr jrer gurve unovgngvbaf, naq gurve
trarnybtl.

4:34 Naq Zrfubono, naq Wnzyrpu, naq Wbfunu, gur fba bs Nznmvnu, 4:35
Naq Wbry, naq Wruh gur fba bs Wbfvovnu, gur fba bs Frenvnu, gur fba bs
Nfvry, 4:36 Naq Ryvbranv, naq Wnnxbonu, naq Wrfubunvnu, naq Nfnvnu,
naq Nqvry, naq Wrfvzvry, naq Oranvnu, 4:37 Naq Mvmn gur fba bs Fuvcuv,
gur fba bs Nyyba, gur fba bs Wrqnvnu, gur fba bs Fuvzev, gur fba bs
Furznvnu; 4:38 Gurfr zragvbarq ol gurve anzrf jrer cevaprf va gurve
snzvyvrf: naq gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref vapernfrq terngyl.

4:39 Naq gurl jrag gb gur ragenapr bs Trqbe, rira hagb gur rnfg fvqr
bs gur inyyrl, gb frrx cnfgher sbe gurve sybpxf.

4:40 Naq gurl sbhaq sng cnfgher naq tbbq, naq gur ynaq jnf jvqr, naq
dhvrg, naq crnprnoyr; sbe gurl bs Unz unq qjryg gurer bs byq.

4:41 Naq gurfr jevggra ol anzr pnzr va gur qnlf bs Urmrxvnu xvat bs
Whqnu, naq fzbgr gurve gragf, naq gur unovgngvbaf gung jrer sbhaq
gurer, naq qrfgeblrq gurz hggreyl hagb guvf qnl, naq qjryg va gurve
ebbzf: orpnhfr gurer jnf cnfgher gurer sbe gurve sybpxf.

4:42 Naq fbzr bs gurz, rira bs gur fbaf bs Fvzrba, svir uhaqerq zra,
jrag gb zbhag Frve, univat sbe gurve pncgnvaf Cryngvnu, naq Arnevnu,
naq Ercunvnu, naq Hmmvry, gur fbaf bs Vfuv.

4:43 Naq gurl fzbgr gur erfg bs gur Nznyrxvgrf gung jrer rfpncrq, naq
qjryg gurer hagb guvf qnl.

5:1 Abj gur fbaf bs Erhora gur svefgobea bs Vfenry, (sbe ur jnf gur
svefgobea; ohg sbenfzhpu nf ur qrsvyrq uvf sngure'f orq, uvf
oveguevtug jnf tvira hagb gur fbaf bs Wbfrcu gur fba bs Vfenry: naq
gur trarnybtl vf abg gb or erpxbarq nsgre gur oveguevtug.

5:2 Sbe Whqnu cerinvyrq nobir uvf oerguera, naq bs uvz pnzr gur puvrs
ehyre; ohg gur oveguevtug jnf Wbfrcu'f:) 5:3 Gur fbaf, V fnl, bs
Erhora gur svefgobea bs Vfenry jrer, Unabpu, naq Cnyyh, Urmeba, naq
Pnezv.

5:4 Gur fbaf bs Wbry; Furznvnu uvf fba, Tbt uvf fba, Fuvzrv uvf fba,
5:5 Zvpnu uvf fba, Ernvn uvf fba, Onny uvf fba, 5:6 Orrenu uvf fba,
jubz Gvytngucvyarfre xvat bs Nfflevn pneevrq njnl pncgvir: ur jnf
cevapr bs gur Erhoravgrf.

5:7 Naq uvf oerguera ol gurve snzvyvrf, jura gur trarnybtl bs gurve
trarengvbaf jnf erpxbarq, jrer gur puvrs, Wrvry, naq Mrpunevnu, 5:8
Naq Oryn gur fba bs Nmnm, gur fba bs Furzn, gur fba bs Wbry, jub qjryg
va Nebre, rira hagb Arob naq Onnyzrba: 5:9 Naq rnfgjneq ur vaunovgrq
hagb gur ragrevat va bs gur jvyqrearff sebz gur evire Rhcuengrf:
orpnhfr gurve pnggyr jrer zhygvcyvrq va gur ynaq bs Tvyrnq.

5:10 Naq va gur qnlf bs Fnhy gurl znqr jne jvgu gur Untnevgrf, jub
sryy ol gurve unaq: naq gurl qjryg va gurve gragf guebhtubhg nyy gur
rnfg ynaq bs Tvyrnq.

5:11 Naq gur puvyqera bs Tnq qjryg bire ntnvafg gurz, va gur ynaq bs
Onfuna hagb Fnypnu: 5:12 Wbry gur puvrs, naq Funcunz gur arkg, naq
Wnnanv, naq Funcung va Onfuna.

5:13 Naq gurve oerguera bs gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref jrer, Zvpunry,
naq Zrfuhyynz, naq Furon, naq Wbenv, naq Wnpuna, naq Mvn, naq Urore,
frira.

5:14 Gurfr ner gur puvyqera bs Novunvy gur fba bs Uhev, gur fba bs
Wnebnu, gur fba bs Tvyrnq, gur fba bs Zvpunry, gur fba bs Wrfuvfunv,
gur fba bs Wnuqb, gur fba bs Ohm; 5:15 Nuv gur fba bs Noqvry, gur fba
bs Thav, puvrs bs gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref.

5:16 Naq gurl qjryg va Tvyrnq va Onfuna, naq va ure gbjaf, naq va nyy
gur fhoheof bs Funeba, hcba gurve obeqref.

5:17 Nyy gurfr jrer erpxbarq ol trarnybtvrf va gur qnlf bs Wbgunz xvat
bs Whqnu, naq va gur qnlf bs Wrebobnz xvat bs Vfenry.

5:18 Gur fbaf bs Erhora, naq gur Tnqvgrf, naq unys gur gevor bs
Znanffru, bs inyvnag zra, zra noyr gb orne ohpxyre naq fjbeq, naq gb
fubbg jvgu obj, naq fxvyshy va jne, jrer sbhe naq sbegl gubhfnaq frira
uhaqerq naq guerrfpber, gung jrag bhg gb gur jne.

5:19 Naq gurl znqr jne jvgu gur Untnevgrf, jvgu Wrghe, naq Arcuvfu,
naq Abqno.

5:20 Naq gurl jrer urycrq ntnvafg gurz, naq gur Untnevgrf jrer
qryvirerq vagb gurve unaq, naq nyy gung jrer jvgu gurz: sbe gurl pevrq
gb Tbq va gur onggyr, naq ur jnf vagerngrq bs gurz; orpnhfr gurl chg
gurve gehfg va uvz.

5:21 Naq gurl gbbx njnl gurve pnggyr; bs gurve pnzryf svsgl gubhfnaq,
naq bs furrc gjb uhaqerq naq svsgl gubhfnaq, naq bs nffrf gjb
gubhfnaq, naq bs zra na uhaqerq gubhfnaq.

5:22 Sbe gurer sryy qbja znal fynva, orpnhfr gur jne jnf bs Tbq. Naq
gurl qjryg va gurve fgrnqf hagvy gur pncgvivgl.

5:23 Naq gur puvyqera bs gur unys gevor bs Znanffru qjryg va gur ynaq:
gurl vapernfrq sebz Onfuna hagb Onnyurezba naq Frave, naq hagb zbhag
Urezba.

5:24 Naq gurfr jrer gur urnqf bs gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, rira
Rcure, naq Vfuv, naq Ryvry, naq Nmevry, naq Wrerzvnu, naq Ubqnivnu,
naq Wnuqvry, zvtugl zra bs inybhe, snzbhf zra, naq urnqf bs gur ubhfr
bs gurve snguref.

5:25 Naq gurl genafterffrq ntnvafg gur Tbq bs gurve snguref, naq jrag
n jubevat nsgre gur tbqf bs gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq, jubz Tbq qrfgeblrq
orsber gurz.

5:26 Naq gur Tbq bs Vfenry fgveerq hc gur fcvevg bs Chy xvat bs
Nfflevn, naq gur fcvevg bs Gvytngucvyarfre xvat bs Nfflevn, naq ur
pneevrq gurz njnl, rira gur Erhoravgrf, naq gur Tnqvgrf, naq gur unys
gevor bs Znanffru, naq oebhtug gurz hagb Unynu, naq Unobe, naq Unen,
naq gb gur evire Tbmna, hagb guvf qnl.

6:1 Gur fbaf bs Yriv; Trefuba, Xbungu, naq Zrenev.

6:2 Naq gur fbaf bs Xbungu; Nzenz, Vmune, naq Uroeba, naq Hmmvry.

6:3 Naq gur puvyqera bs Nzenz; Nneba, naq Zbfrf, naq Zvevnz. Gur fbaf
nyfb bs Nneba; Anqno, naq Novuh, Ryrnmne, naq Vgunzne.

6:4 Ryrnmne ortng Cuvarunf, Cuvarunf ortng Novfuhn, 6:5 Naq Novfuhn
ortng Ohxxv, naq Ohxxv ortng Hmmv, 6:6 Naq Hmmv ortng Mrenuvnu, naq
Mrenuvnu ortng Zrenvbgu, 6:7 Zrenvbgu ortng Nznevnu, naq Nznevnu ortng
Nuvgho, 6:8 Naq Nuvgho ortng Mnqbx, naq Mnqbx ortng Nuvznnm, 6:9 Naq
Nuvznnm ortng Nmnevnu, naq Nmnevnu ortng Wbunana, 6:10 Naq Wbunana
ortng Nmnevnu, (ur vg vf gung rkrphgrq gur cevrfg'f bssvpr va gur
grzcyr gung Fbybzba ohvyg va Wrehfnyrz:) 6:11 Naq Nmnevnu ortng
Nznevnu, naq Nznevnu ortng Nuvgho, 6:12 Naq Nuvgho ortng Mnqbx, naq
Mnqbx ortng Funyyhz, 6:13 Naq Funyyhz ortng Uvyxvnu, naq Uvyxvnu ortng
Nmnevnu, 6:14 Naq Nmnevnu ortng Frenvnu, naq Frenvnu ortng Wrubmnqnx,
6:15 Naq Wrubmnqnx jrag vagb pncgvivgl, jura gur YBEQ pneevrq njnl
Whqnu naq Wrehfnyrz ol gur unaq bs Arohpunqarmmne.

6:16 Gur fbaf bs Yriv; Trefubz, Xbungu, naq Zrenev.

6:17 Naq gurfr or gur anzrf bs gur fbaf bs Trefubz; Yvoav, naq Fuvzrv.

6:18 Naq gur fbaf bs Xbungu jrer, Nzenz, naq Vmune, naq Uroeba, naq
Hmmvry.

6:19 Gur fbaf bs Zrenev; Znuyv, naq Zhfuv. Naq gurfr ner gur snzvyvrf
bs gur Yrivgrf nppbeqvat gb gurve snguref.

6:20 Bs Trefubz; Yvoav uvf fba, Wnungu uvf fba, Mvzznu uvf fba, 6:21
Wbnu uvf fba, Vqqb uvf fba, Mrenu uvf fba, Wrngrenv uvf fba.

6:22 Gur fbaf bs Xbungu; Nzzvanqno uvf fba, Xbenu uvf fba, Nffve uvf
fba, 6:23 Ryxnanu uvf fba, naq Rovnfncu uvf fba, naq Nffve uvf fba,
6:24 Gnungu uvf fba, Hevry uvf fba, Hmmvnu uvf fba, naq Funhy uvf fba.

6:25 Naq gur fbaf bs Ryxnanu; Nznfnv, naq Nuvzbgu.

6:26 Nf sbe Ryxnanu: gur fbaf bs Ryxnanu; Mbcunv uvf fba, naq Anungu
uvf fba, 6:27 Ryvno uvf fba, Wrebunz uvf fba, Ryxnanu uvf fba.

6:28 Naq gur fbaf bs Fnzhry; gur svefgobea Infuav, naq Novnu.

6:29 Gur fbaf bs Zrenev; Znuyv, Yvoav uvf fba, Fuvzrv uvf fba, Hmmn
uvf fba, 6:30 Fuvzrn uvf fba, Unttvnu uvf fba, Nfnvnu uvf fba.

6:31 Naq gurfr ner gurl jubz Qnivq frg bire gur freivpr bs fbat va gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, nsgre gung gur nex unq erfg.

6:32 Naq gurl zvavfgrerq orsber gur qjryyvat cynpr bs gur gnoreanpyr
bs gur pbatertngvba jvgu fvatvat, hagvy Fbybzba unq ohvyg gur ubhfr bs
gur YBEQ va Wrehfnyrz: naq gura gurl jnvgrq ba gurve bssvpr nppbeqvat
gb gurve beqre.

6:33 Naq gurfr ner gurl gung jnvgrq jvgu gurve puvyqera. Bs gur fbaf
bs gur Xbunguvgrf: Urzna n fvatre, gur fba bs Wbry, gur fba bs
Furzhry, 6:34 Gur fba bs Ryxnanu, gur fba bs Wrebunz, gur fba bs
Ryvry, gur fba bs Gbnu, 6:35 Gur fba bs Mhcu, gur fba bs Ryxnanu, gur
fba bs Znungu, gur fba bs Nznfnv, 6:36 Gur fba bs Ryxnanu, gur fba bs
Wbry, gur fba bs Nmnevnu, gur fba bs Mrcunavnu, 6:37 Gur fba bs
Gnungu, gur fba bs Nffve, gur fba bs Rovnfncu, gur fba bs Xbenu, 6:38
Gur fba bs Vmune, gur fba bs Xbungu, gur fba bs Yriv, gur fba bs
Vfenry.

6:39 Naq uvf oebgure Nfncu, jub fgbbq ba uvf evtug unaq, rira Nfncu
gur fba bs Orenpuvnu, gur fba bs Fuvzrn, 6:40 Gur fba bs Zvpunry, gur
fba bs Onnfrvnu, gur fba bs Znypuvnu, 6:41 Gur fba bs Rguav, gur fba
bs Mrenu, gur fba bs Nqnvnu, 6:42 Gur fba bs Rguna, gur fba bs Mvzznu,
gur fba bs Fuvzrv, 6:43 Gur fba bs Wnungu, gur fba bs Trefubz, gur fba
bs Yriv.

6:44 Naq gurve oerguera gur fbaf bs Zrenev fgbbq ba gur yrsg unaq:
Rguna gur fba bs Xvfuv, gur fba bs Noqv, gur fba bs Znyyhpu, 6:45 Gur
fba bs Unfunovnu, gur fba bs Nznmvnu, gur fba bs Uvyxvnu, 6:46 Gur fba
bs Nzmv, gur fba bs Onav, gur fba bs Funzre, 6:47 Gur fba bs Znuyv,
gur fba bs Zhfuv, gur fba bs Zrenev, gur fba bs Yriv.

6:48 Gurve oerguera nyfb gur Yrivgrf jrer nccbvagrq hagb nyy znaare bs
freivpr bs gur gnoreanpyr bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq.

6:49 Ohg Nneba naq uvf fbaf bssrerq hcba gur nygne bs gur oheag
bssrevat, naq ba gur nygne bs vaprafr, naq jrer nccbvagrq sbe nyy gur
jbex bs gur cynpr zbfg ubyl, naq gb znxr na ngbarzrag sbe Vfenry,
nppbeqvat gb nyy gung Zbfrf gur freinag bs Tbq unq pbzznaqrq.

6:50 Naq gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Nneba; Ryrnmne uvf fba, Cuvarunf uvf
fba, Novfuhn uvf fba, 6:51 Ohxxv uvf fba, Hmmv uvf fba, Mrenuvnu uvf
fba, 6:52 Zrenvbgu uvf fba, Nznevnu uvf fba, Nuvgho uvf fba, 6:53
Mnqbx uvf fba, Nuvznnm uvf fba.

6:54 Abj gurfr ner gurve qjryyvat cynprf guebhtubhg gurve pnfgyrf va
gurve pbnfgf, bs gur fbaf bs Nneba, bs gur snzvyvrf bs gur Xbunguvgrf:
sbe gurvef jnf gur ybg.

6:55 Naq gurl tnir gurz Uroeba va gur ynaq bs Whqnu, naq gur fhoheof
gurerbs ebhaq nobhg vg.

6:56 Ohg gur svryqf bs gur pvgl, naq gur ivyyntrf gurerbs, gurl tnir
gb Pnyro gur fba bs Wrcuhaaru.

6:57 Naq gb gur fbaf bs Nneba gurl tnir gur pvgvrf bs Whqnu, anzryl,
Uroeba, gur pvgl bs ershtr, naq Yvoanu jvgu ure fhoheof, naq Wnggve,
naq Rfugrzbn, jvgu gurve fhoheof, 6:58 Naq Uvyra jvgu ure fhoheof,
Qrove jvgu ure fhoheof, 6:59 Naq Nfuna jvgu ure fhoheof, naq
Orgufurzrfu jvgu ure fhoheof: 6:60 Naq bhg bs gur gevor bs Orawnzva;
Tron jvgu ure fhoheof, naq Nyrzrgu jvgu ure fhoheof, naq Nangubgu jvgu
ure fhoheof. Nyy gurve pvgvrf guebhtubhg gurve snzvyvrf jrer guvegrra
pvgvrf.

6:61 Naq hagb gur fbaf bs Xbungu, juvpu jrer yrsg bs gur snzvyl bs
gung gevor, jrer pvgvrf tvira bhg bs gur unys gevor, anzryl, bhg bs
gur unys gevor bs Znanffru, ol ybg, gra pvgvrf.

6:62 Naq gb gur fbaf bs Trefubz guebhtubhg gurve snzvyvrf bhg bs gur
gevor bs Vffnpune, naq bhg bs gur gevor bs Nfure, naq bhg bs gur gevor
bs Ancugnyv, naq bhg bs gur gevor bs Znanffru va Onfuna, guvegrra
pvgvrf.

6:63 Hagb gur fbaf bs Zrenev jrer tvira ol ybg, guebhtubhg gurve
snzvyvrf, bhg bs gur gevor bs Erhora, naq bhg bs gur gevor bs Tnq, naq
bhg bs gur gevor bs Mrohyha, gjryir pvgvrf.

6:64 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry tnir gb gur Yrivgrf gurfr pvgvrf jvgu
gurve fhoheof.

6:65 Naq gurl tnir ol ybg bhg bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Whqnu,
naq bhg bs gur gevor bs gur puvyqera bs Fvzrba, naq bhg bs gur gevor
bs gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva, gurfr pvgvrf, juvpu ner pnyyrq ol gurve
anzrf.

6:66 Naq gur erfvqhr bs gur snzvyvrf bs gur fbaf bs Xbungu unq pvgvrf
bs gurve pbnfgf bhg bs gur gevor bs Rcuenvz.

6:67 Naq gurl tnir hagb gurz, bs gur pvgvrf bs ershtr, Furpurz va
zbhag Rcuenvz jvgu ure fhoheof; gurl tnir nyfb Trmre jvgu ure fhoheof,
6:68 Naq Wbxzrnz jvgu ure fhoheof, naq Orguubeba jvgu ure fhoheof,
6:69 Naq Nvwnyba jvgu ure fhoheof, naq Tnguevzzba jvgu ure fhoheof:
6:70 Naq bhg bs gur unys gevor bs Znanffru; Nare jvgu ure fhoheof, naq
Ovyrnz jvgu ure fhoheof, sbe gur snzvyl bs gur erzanag bs gur fbaf bs
Xbungu.

6:71 Hagb gur fbaf bs Trefubz jrer tvira bhg bs gur snzvyl bs gur unys
gevor bs Znanffru, Tbyna va Onfuna jvgu ure fhoheof, naq Nfugnebgu
jvgu ure fhoheof: 6:72 Naq bhg bs gur gevor bs Vffnpune; Xrqrfu jvgu
ure fhoheof, Qnorengu jvgu ure fhoheof, 6:73 Naq Enzbgu jvgu ure
fhoheof, naq Narz jvgu ure fhoheof: 6:74 Naq bhg bs gur gevor bs
Nfure; Znfuny jvgu ure fhoheof, naq Noqba jvgu ure fhoheof, 6:75 Naq
Uhxbx jvgu ure fhoheof, naq Erubo jvgu ure fhoheof: 6:76 Naq bhg bs
gur gevor bs Ancugnyv; Xrqrfu va Tnyvyrr jvgu ure fhoheof, naq Unzzba
jvgu ure fhoheof, naq Xvewngunvz jvgu ure fhoheof.

6:77 Hagb gur erfg bs gur puvyqera bs Zrenev jrer tvira bhg bs gur
gevor bs Mrohyha, Evzzba jvgu ure fhoheof, Gnobe jvgu ure fhoheof:
6:78 Naq ba gur bgure fvqr Wbeqna ol Wrevpub, ba gur rnfg fvqr bs
Wbeqna, jrer tvira gurz bhg bs gur gevor bs Erhora, Ormre va gur
jvyqrearff jvgu ure fhoheof, naq Wnumnu jvgu ure fhoheof, 6:79
Xrqrzbgu nyfb jvgu ure fhoheof, naq Zrcunngu jvgu ure fhoheof: 6:80
Naq bhg bs gur gevor bs Tnq; Enzbgu va Tvyrnq jvgu ure fhoheof, naq
Znunanvz jvgu ure fhoheof, 6:81 Naq Urfuoba jvgu ure fhoheof, naq
Wnmre jvgu ure fhoheof.

7:1 Abj gur fbaf bs Vffnpune jrer, Gbyn, naq Chnu, Wnfuho, naq
Fuvzebz, sbhe.

7:2 Naq gur fbaf bs Gbyn; Hmmv, naq Ercunvnu, naq Wrevry, naq Wnuznv,
naq Wvofnz, naq Furzhry, urnqf bs gurve sngure'f ubhfr, gb jvg, bs
Gbyn: gurl jrer inyvnag zra bs zvtug va gurve trarengvbaf; jubfr
ahzore jnf va gur qnlf bs Qnivq gjb naq gjragl gubhfnaq naq fvk
uhaqerq.

7:3 Naq gur fbaf bs Hmmv; Vmenuvnu: naq gur fbaf bs Vmenuvnu; Zvpunry,
naq Bonqvnu, naq Wbry, Vfuvnu, svir: nyy bs gurz puvrs zra.

7:4 Naq jvgu gurz, ol gurve trarengvbaf, nsgre gur ubhfr bs gurve
snguref, jrer onaqf bs fbyqvref sbe jne, fvk naq guvegl gubhfnaq zra:
sbe gurl unq znal jvirf naq fbaf.

7:5 Naq gurve oerguera nzbat nyy gur snzvyvrf bs Vffnpune jrer inyvnag
zra bs zvtug, erpxbarq va nyy ol gurve trarnybtvrf sbhefpber naq frira
gubhfnaq.

7:6 Gur fbaf bs Orawnzva; Oryn, naq Orpure, naq Wrqvnry, guerr.

7:7 Naq gur fbaf bs Oryn; Rmoba, naq Hmmv, naq Hmmvry, naq Wrevzbgu,
naq Vev, svir; urnqf bs gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, zvtugl zra bs
inybhe; naq jrer erpxbarq ol gurve trarnybtvrf gjragl naq gjb gubhfnaq
naq guvegl naq sbhe.

7:8 Naq gur fbaf bs Orpure; Mrzven, naq Wbnfu, naq Ryvrmre, naq
Ryvbranv, naq Bzev, naq Wrevzbgu, naq Novnu, naq Nangubgu, naq
Nynzrgu. Nyy gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Orpure.

7:9 Naq gur ahzore bs gurz, nsgre gurve trarnybtl ol gurve
trarengvbaf, urnqf bs gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, zvtugl zra bs
inybhe, jnf gjragl gubhfnaq naq gjb uhaqerq.

7:10 Gur fbaf nyfb bs Wrqvnry; Ovyuna: naq gur fbaf bs Ovyuna; Wrhfu,
naq Orawnzva, naq Ruhq, naq Purannanu, naq Mrguna, naq Gunefuvfu, naq
Nuvfunune.

7:11 Nyy gurfr gur fbaf bs Wrqvnry, ol gur urnqf bs gurve snguref,
zvtugl zra bs inybhe, jrer friragrra gubhfnaq naq gjb uhaqerq
fbyqvref, svg gb tb bhg sbe jne naq onggyr.

7:12 Fuhccvz nyfb, naq Uhccvz, gur puvyqera bs Ve, naq Uhfuvz, gur
fbaf bs Nure.

7:13 Gur fbaf bs Ancugnyv; Wnumvry, naq Thav, naq Wrmre, naq Funyyhz,
gur fbaf bs Ovyunu.

7:14 Gur fbaf bs Znanffru; Nfuevry, jubz fur oner: (ohg uvf pbaphovar
gur Nenzvgrff oner Znpuve gur sngure bs Tvyrnq: 7:15 Naq Znpuve gbbx
gb jvsr gur fvfgre bs Uhccvz naq Fuhccvz, jubfr fvfgre'f anzr jnf
Znnpunu;) naq gur anzr bs gur frpbaq jnf Mrybcurunq: naq Mrybcurunq
unq qnhtugref.

7:16 Naq Znnpunu gur jvsr bs Znpuve oner n fba, naq fur pnyyrq uvf
anzr Crerfu; naq gur anzr bs uvf oebgure jnf Furerfu; naq uvf fbaf
jrer Hynz naq Enxrz.

7:17 Naq gur fbaf bs Hynz; Orqna. Gurfr jrer gur fbaf bs Tvyrnq, gur
fba bs Znpuve, gur fba bs Znanffru.

7:18 Naq uvf fvfgre Unzzbyrxrgu oner Vfubq, naq Novrmre, naq Znunynu.

7:19 Naq gur fbaf bs Furzvqnu jrer, Nuvna, naq Furpurz, naq Yvxuv, naq
Navnz.

7:20 Naq gur fbaf bs Rcuenvz; Fuhgurynu, naq Orerq uvf fba, naq Gnungu
uvf fba, naq Rynqnu uvf fba, naq Gnungu uvf fba, 7:21 Naq Mnonq uvf
fba, naq Fuhgurynu uvf fba, naq Rmre, naq Ryrnq, jubz gur zra bs Tngu
gung jrer obea va gung ynaq fyrj, orpnhfr gurl pnzr qbja gb gnxr njnl
gurve pnggyr.

7:22 Naq Rcuenvz gurve sngure zbhearq znal qnlf, naq uvf oerguera pnzr
gb pbzsbeg uvz.

7:23 Naq jura ur jrag va gb uvf jvsr, fur pbaprvirq, naq oner n fba,
naq ur pnyyrq uvf anzr Orevnu, orpnhfr vg jrag rivy jvgu uvf ubhfr.

7:24 (Naq uvf qnhtugre jnf Furenu, jub ohvyg Orguubeba gur argure, naq
gur hccre, naq Hmmrafurenu.)  7:25 Naq Ercunu jnf uvf fba, nyfb
Erfurcu, naq Grynu uvf fba, naq Gnuna uvf fba.

7:26 Ynnqna uvf fba, Nzzvuhq uvf fba, Ryvfunzn uvf fba.

7:27 Aba uvf fba, Wrubfuhnu uvf fba.

7:28 Naq gurve cbffrffvbaf naq unovgngvbaf jrer, Orgury naq gur gbjaf
gurerbs, naq rnfgjneq Annena, naq jrfgjneq Trmre, jvgu gur gbjaf
gurerbs; Furpurz nyfb naq gur gbjaf gurerbs, hagb Tnmn naq gur gbjaf
gurerbs: 7:29 Naq ol gur obeqref bs gur puvyqera bs Znanffru,
Orgufurna naq ure gbjaf, Gnnanpu naq ure gbjaf, Zrtvqqb naq ure gbjaf,
Qbe naq ure gbjaf. Va gurfr qjryg gur puvyqera bs Wbfrcu gur fba bs
Vfenry.

7:30 Gur fbaf bs Nfure; Vzanu, naq Vfhnu, naq Vfuhnv, naq Orevnu, naq
Frenu gurve fvfgre.

7:31 Naq gur fbaf bs Orevnu; Urore, naq Znypuvry, jub vf gur sngure bs
Ovemnivgu.

7:32 Naq Urore ortng Wncuyrg, naq Fubzre, naq Ubgunz, naq Fuhn gurve
fvfgre.

7:33 Naq gur fbaf bs Wncuyrg; Cnfnpu, naq Ovzuny, naq Nfuingu. Gurfr
ner gur puvyqera bs Wncuyrg.

7:34 Naq gur fbaf bs Funzre; Nuv, naq Ebutnu, Wruhoonu, naq Nenz.

7:35 Naq gur fbaf bs uvf oebgure Uryrz; Mbcunu, naq Vzan, naq Furyrfu,
naq Nzny.

7:36 Gur fbaf bs Mbcunu; Fhnu, naq Unearcure, naq Fuhny, naq Orev, naq
Vzenu, 7:37 Ormre, naq Ubq, naq Funzzn, naq Fuvyfunu, naq Vguena, naq
Orren.

7:38 Naq gur fbaf bs Wrgure; Wrcuhaaru, naq Cvfcnu, naq Nen.

7:39 Naq gur fbaf bs Hyyn; Nenu, naq Unavry, naq Ermvn.

7:40 Nyy gurfr jrer gur puvyqera bs Nfure, urnqf bs gurve sngure'f
ubhfr, pubvpr naq zvtugl zra bs inybhe, puvrs bs gur cevaprf. Naq gur
ahzore guebhtubhg gur trarnybtl bs gurz gung jrer ncg gb gur jne naq
gb onggyr jnf gjragl naq fvk gubhfnaq zra.

8:1 Abj Orawnzva ortng Oryn uvf svefgobea, Nfuory gur frpbaq, naq
Nunenu gur guveq, 8:2 Abunu gur sbhegu, naq Encun gur svsgu.

8:3 Naq gur fbaf bs Oryn jrer, Nqqne, naq Tren, naq Novuhq, 8:4 Naq
Novfuhn, naq Annzna, naq Nubnu, 8:5 Naq Tren, naq Furcuhcuna, naq
Uhenz.

8:6 Naq gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Ruhq: gurfr ner gur urnqf bs gur snguref
bs gur vaunovgnagf bs Tron, naq gurl erzbirq gurz gb Znanungu: 8:7 Naq
Annzna, naq Nuvnu, naq Tren, ur erzbirq gurz, naq ortng Hmmn, naq
Nuvuhq.

8:8 Naq Fununenvz ortng puvyqera va gur pbhagel bs Zbno, nsgre ur unq
frag gurz njnl; Uhfuvz naq Onnen jrer uvf jvirf.

8:9 Naq ur ortng bs Ubqrfu uvf jvsr, Wbono, naq Mvovn, naq Zrfun, naq
Znypunz, 8:10 Naq Wrhm, naq Funpuvn, naq Zvezn. Gurfr jrer uvf fbaf,
urnqf bs gur snguref.

8:11 Naq bs Uhfuvz ur ortng Novgho, naq Rycnny.

8:12 Gur fbaf bs Rycnny; Rore, naq Zvfunz, naq Funzrq, jub ohvyg Bab,
naq Ybq, jvgu gur gbjaf gurerbs: 8:13 Orevnu nyfb, naq Furzn, jub jrer
urnqf bs gur snguref bs gur vaunovgnagf bs Nvwnyba, jub qebir njnl gur
vaunovgnagf bs Tngu: 8:14 Naq Nuvb, Funfunx, naq Wrerzbgu, 8:15 Naq
Mronqvnu, naq Nenq, naq Nqre, 8:16 Naq Zvpunry, naq Vfcnu, naq Wbun,
gur fbaf bs Orevnu; 8:17 Naq Mronqvnu, naq Zrfuhyynz, naq Urmrxv, naq
Urore, 8:18 Vfuzrenv nyfb, naq Wrmyvnu, naq Wbono, gur fbaf bs Rycnny;
8:19 Naq Wnxvz, naq Mvpuev, naq Mnoqv, 8:20 Naq Ryvranv, naq Mvygunv,
naq Ryvry, 8:21 Naq Nqnvnu, naq Orenvnu, naq Fuvzengu, gur fbaf bs
Fuvzuv; 8:22 Naq Vfucna, naq Urore, naq Ryvry, 8:23 Naq Noqba, naq
Mvpuev, naq Unana, 8:24 Naq Unanavnu, naq Rynz, naq Nagbguvwnu, 8:25
Naq Vcurqrvnu, naq Crahry, gur fbaf bs Funfunx; 8:26 Naq Funzfurenv,
naq Furunevnu, naq Ngunyvnu, 8:27 Naq Wnerfvnu, naq Ryvnu, naq Mvpuev,
gur fbaf bs Wrebunz.

8:28 Gurfr jrer urnqf bs gur snguref, ol gurve trarengvbaf, puvrs zra.

Gurfr qjryg va Wrehfnyrz.

8:29 Naq ng Tvorba qjryg gur sngure bs Tvorba; jubfr jvsr'f anzr jnf
Znnpunu: 8:30 Naq uvf svefgobea fba Noqba, naq Mhe, naq Xvfu, naq
Onny, naq Anqno, 8:31 Naq Trqbe, naq Nuvb, naq Mnpure.

8:32 Naq Zvxybgu ortng Fuvzrnu. Naq gurfr nyfb qjryg jvgu gurve
oerguera va Wrehfnyrz, bire ntnvafg gurz.

8:33 Naq Are ortng Xvfu, naq Xvfu ortng Fnhy, naq Fnhy ortng Wbanguna,
naq Znypuvfuhn, naq Novanqno, naq Rfuonny.

8:34 Naq gur fba bs Wbanguna jnf Zrevoonny; naq Zrevoonny ortng Zvpnu.

8:35 Naq gur fbaf bs Zvpnu jrer, Cvguba, naq Zryrpu, naq Gnern, naq
Nunm.

8:36 Naq Nunm ortng Wrubnqnu; naq Wrubnqnu ortng Nyrzrgu, naq
Nmznirgu, naq Mvzev; naq Mvzev ortng Zbmn, 8:37 Naq Zbmn ortng Ovarn:
Encun jnf uvf fba, Ryrnfnu uvf fba, Nmry uvf fba: 8:38 Naq Nmry unq
fvk fbaf, jubfr anzrf ner gurfr, Nmevxnz, Obpureh, naq Vfuznry, naq
Furnevnu, naq Bonqvnu, naq Unana. Nyy gurfr jrer gur fbaf bs Nmry.

8:39 Naq gur fbaf bs Rfurx uvf oebgure jrer, Hynz uvf svefgobea,
Wruhfu gur frpbaq, naq Ryvcuryrg gur guveq.

8:40 Naq gur fbaf bs Hynz jrer zvtugl zra bs inybhe, nepuref, naq unq
znal fbaf, naq fbaf' fbaf, na uhaqerq naq svsgl. Nyy gurfr ner bs gur
fbaf bs Orawnzva.

9:1 Fb nyy Vfenry jrer erpxbarq ol trarnybtvrf; naq, orubyq, gurl jrer
jevggra va gur obbx bs gur xvatf bs Vfenry naq Whqnu, jub jrer pneevrq
njnl gb Onolyba sbe gurve genafterffvba.

9:2 Abj gur svefg vaunovgnagf gung qjryg va gurve cbffrffvbaf va gurve
pvgvrf jrer, gur Vfenryvgrf, gur cevrfgf, Yrivgrf, naq gur Arguvavzf.

9:3 Naq va Wrehfnyrz qjryg bs gur puvyqera bs Whqnu, naq bs gur
puvyqera bs Orawnzva, naq bs gur puvyqera bs Rcuenvz, naq Znanffru;
9:4 Hgunv gur fba bs Nzzvuhq, gur fba bs Bzev, gur fba bs Vzev, gur
fba bs Onav, bs gur puvyqera bs Cunerm gur fba bs Whqnu.

9:5 Naq bs gur Fuvybavgrf; Nfnvnu gur svefgobea, naq uvf fbaf.

9:6 Naq bs gur fbaf bs Mrenu; Wrhry, naq gurve oerguera, fvk uhaqerq
naq avargl.

9:7 Naq bs gur fbaf bs Orawnzva; Fnyyh gur fba bs Zrfuhyynz, gur fba
bs Ubqnivnu, gur fba bs Unfrahnu, 9:8 Naq Voarvnu gur fba bs Wrebunz,
naq Rynu gur fba bs Hmmv, gur fba bs Zvpuev, naq Zrfuhyynz gur fba bs
Furcunguvnu, gur fba bs Erhry, gur fba bs Voavwnu; 9:9 Naq gurve
oerguera, nppbeqvat gb gurve trarengvbaf, avar uhaqerq naq svsgl naq
fvk. Nyy gurfr zra jrer puvrs bs gur snguref va gur ubhfr bs gurve
snguref.

9:10 Naq bs gur cevrfgf; Wrqnvnu, naq Wrubvnevo, naq Wnpuva, 9:11 Naq
Nmnevnu gur fba bs Uvyxvnu, gur fba bs Zrfuhyynz, gur fba bs Mnqbx,
gur fba bs Zrenvbgu, gur fba bs Nuvgho, gur ehyre bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq;
9:12 Naq Nqnvnu gur fba bs Wrebunz, gur fba bs Cnfuhe, gur fba bs
Znypuvwnu, naq Znnfvnv gur fba bs Nqvry, gur fba bs Wnumrenu, gur fba
bs Zrfuhyynz, gur fba bs Zrfuvyyrzvgu, gur fba bs Vzzre; 9:13 Naq
gurve oerguera, urnqf bs gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, n gubhfnaq naq
frira uhaqerq naq guerrfpber; irel noyr zra sbe gur jbex bs gur
freivpr bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq.

9:14 Naq bs gur Yrivgrf; Furznvnu gur fba bs Unffuho, gur fba bs
Nmevxnz, gur fba bs Unfunovnu, bs gur fbaf bs Zrenev; 9:15 Naq
Onxonxxne, Urerfu, naq Tnyny, naq Znggnavnu gur fba bs Zvpnu, gur fba
bs Mvpuev, gur fba bs Nfncu; 9:16 Naq Bonqvnu gur fba bs Furznvnu, gur
fba bs Tnyny, gur fba bs Wrqhguha, naq Orerpuvnu gur fba bs Nfn, gur
fba bs Ryxnanu, gung qjryg va gur ivyyntrf bs gur Argbcunguvgrf.

9:17 Naq gur cbegref jrer, Funyyhz, naq Nxxho, naq Gnyzba, naq Nuvzna,
naq gurve oerguera: Funyyhz jnf gur puvrs; 9:18 Jub uvguregb jnvgrq va
gur xvat'f tngr rnfgjneq: gurl jrer cbegref va gur pbzcnavrf bs gur
puvyqera bs Yriv.

9:19 Naq Funyyhz gur fba bs Xber, gur fba bs Rovnfncu, gur fba bs
Xbenu, naq uvf oerguera, bs gur ubhfr bs uvf sngure, gur Xbenuvgrf,
jrer bire gur jbex bs gur freivpr, xrrcref bs gur tngrf bs gur
gnoreanpyr: naq gurve snguref, orvat bire gur ubfg bs gur YBEQ, jrer
xrrcref bs gur ragel.

9:20 Naq Cuvarunf gur fba bs Ryrnmne jnf gur ehyre bire gurz va gvzr
cnfg, naq gur YBEQ jnf jvgu uvz.

9:21 Naq Mrpunevnu gur fba bs Zrfuryrzvnu jnf cbegre bs gur qbbe bs
gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba.

9:22 Nyy gurfr juvpu jrer pubfra gb or cbegref va gur tngrf jrer gjb
uhaqerq naq gjryir. Gurfr jrer erpxbarq ol gurve trarnybtl va gurve
ivyyntrf, jubz Qnivq naq Fnzhry gur frre qvq beqnva va gurve frg
bssvpr.

9:23 Fb gurl naq gurve puvyqera unq gur birefvtug bs gur tngrf bs gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, anzryl, gur ubhfr bs gur gnoreanpyr, ol jneqf.

9:24 Va sbhe dhnegref jrer gur cbegref, gbjneq gur rnfg, jrfg, abegu,
naq fbhgu.

9:25 Naq gurve oerguera, juvpu jrer va gurve ivyyntrf, jrer gb pbzr
nsgre frira qnlf sebz gvzr gb gvzr jvgu gurz.

9:26 Sbe gurfr Yrivgrf, gur sbhe puvrs cbegref, jrer va gurve frg
bssvpr, naq jrer bire gur punzoref naq gernfhevrf bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq.

9:27 Naq gurl ybqtrq ebhaq nobhg gur ubhfr bs Tbq, orpnhfr gur punetr
jnf hcba gurz, naq gur bcravat gurerbs rirel zbeavat cregnvarq gb
gurz.

9:28 Naq pregnva bs gurz unq gur punetr bs gur zvavfgrevat irffryf,
gung gurl fubhyq oevat gurz va naq bhg ol gnyr.

9:29 Fbzr bs gurz nyfb jrer nccbvagrq gb birefrr gur irffryf, naq nyy
gur vafgehzragf bs gur fnapghnel, naq gur svar sybhe, naq gur jvar,
naq gur bvy, naq gur senaxvaprafr, naq gur fcvprf.

9:30 Naq fbzr bs gur fbaf bs gur cevrfgf znqr gur bvagzrag bs gur
fcvprf.

9:31 Naq Znggvguvnu, bar bs gur Yrivgrf, jub jnf gur svefgobea bs
Funyyhz gur Xbenuvgr, unq gur frg bssvpr bire gur guvatf gung jrer
znqr va gur cnaf.

9:32 Naq bgure bs gurve oerguera, bs gur fbaf bs gur Xbunguvgrf, jrer
bire gur furjoernq, gb cercner vg rirel fnoongu.

9:33 Naq gurfr ner gur fvatref, puvrs bs gur snguref bs gur Yrivgrf,
jub erznvavat va gur punzoref jrer serr: sbe gurl jrer rzcyblrq va
gung jbex qnl naq avtug.

9:34 Gurfr puvrs snguref bs gur Yrivgrf jrer puvrs guebhtubhg gurve
trarengvbaf; gurfr qjryg ng Wrehfnyrz.

9:35 Naq va Tvorba qjryg gur sngure bs Tvorba, Wruvry, jubfr jvsr'f
anzr jnf Znnpunu: 9:36 Naq uvf svefgobea fba Noqba, gura Mhe, naq
Xvfu, naq Onny, naq Are, naq Anqno.

9:37 Naq Trqbe, naq Nuvb, naq Mrpunevnu, naq Zvxybgu.

9:38 Naq Zvxybgu ortng Fuvzrnz. Naq gurl nyfb qjryg jvgu gurve
oerguera ng Wrehfnyrz, bire ntnvafg gurve oerguera.

9:39 Naq Are ortng Xvfu; naq Xvfu ortng Fnhy; naq Fnhy ortng Wbanguna,
naq Znypuvfuhn, naq Novanqno, naq Rfuonny.

9:40 Naq gur fba bs Wbanguna jnf Zrevoonny: naq Zrevoonny ortng Zvpnu.

9:41 Naq gur fbaf bs Zvpnu jrer, Cvguba, naq Zryrpu, naq Gnuern, naq
Nunm.

9:42 Naq Nunm ortng Wnenu; naq Wnenu ortng Nyrzrgu, naq Nmznirgu, naq
Mvzev; naq Mvzev ortng Zbmn; 9:43 Naq Zbmn ortng Ovarn; naq Ercunvnu
uvf fba, Ryrnfnu uvf fba, Nmry uvf fba.

9:44 Naq Nmry unq fvk fbaf, jubfr anzrf ner gurfr, Nmevxnz, Obpureh,
naq Vfuznry, naq Furnevnu, naq Bonqvnu, naq Unana: gurfr jrer gur fbaf
bs Nmry.

10:1 Abj gur Cuvyvfgvarf sbhtug ntnvafg Vfenry; naq gur zra bs Vfenry
syrq sebz orsber gur Cuvyvfgvarf, naq sryy qbja fynva va zbhag Tvyobn.

10:2 Naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf sbyybjrq uneq nsgre Fnhy, naq nsgre uvf fbaf;
naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf fyrj Wbanguna, naq Novanqno, naq Znypuvfuhn, gur
fbaf bs Fnhy.

10:3 Naq gur onggyr jrag fber ntnvafg Fnhy, naq gur nepuref uvg uvz,
naq ur jnf jbhaqrq bs gur nepuref.

10:4 Gura fnvq Fnhy gb uvf nezbheornere, Qenj gul fjbeq, naq guehfg zr
guebhtu gurerjvgu; yrfg gurfr hapvephzpvfrq pbzr naq nohfr zr. Ohg uvf
nezbheornere jbhyq abg; sbe ur jnf fber nsenvq. Fb Fnhy gbbx n fjbeq,
naq sryy hcba vg.

10:5 Naq jura uvf nezbheornere fnj gung Fnhy jnf qrnq, ur sryy
yvxrjvfr ba gur fjbeq, naq qvrq.

10:6 Fb Fnhy qvrq, naq uvf guerr fbaf, naq nyy uvf ubhfr qvrq
gbtrgure.

10:7 Naq jura nyy gur zra bs Vfenry gung jrer va gur inyyrl fnj gung
gurl syrq, naq gung Fnhy naq uvf fbaf jrer qrnq, gura gurl sbefbbx
gurve pvgvrf, naq syrq: naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf pnzr naq qjryg va gurz.

10:8 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ba gur zbeebj, jura gur Cuvyvfgvarf pnzr gb
fgevc gur fynva, gung gurl sbhaq Fnhy naq uvf fbaf snyyra va zbhag
Tvyobn.

10:9 Naq jura gurl unq fgevccrq uvz, gurl gbbx uvf urnq, naq uvf
nezbhe, naq frag vagb gur ynaq bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf ebhaq nobhg, gb
pneel gvqvatf hagb gurve vqbyf, naq gb gur crbcyr.

10:10 Naq gurl chg uvf nezbhe va gur ubhfr bs gurve tbqf, naq snfgrarq
uvf urnq va gur grzcyr bs Qntba.

10:11 Naq jura nyy Wnorfutvyrnq urneq nyy gung gur Cuvyvfgvarf unq
qbar gb Fnhy, 10:12 Gurl nebfr, nyy gur inyvnag zra, naq gbbx njnl gur
obql bs Fnhy, naq gur obqvrf bs uvf fbaf, naq oebhtug gurz gb Wnorfu,
naq ohevrq gurve obarf haqre gur bnx va Wnorfu, naq snfgrq frira qnlf.

10:13 Fb Fnhy qvrq sbe uvf genafterffvba juvpu ur pbzzvggrq ntnvafg
gur YBEQ, rira ntnvafg gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ, juvpu ur xrcg abg, naq
nyfb sbe nfxvat pbhafry bs bar gung unq n snzvyvne fcvevg, gb radhver
bs vg; 10:14 Naq radhverq abg bs gur YBEQ: gurersber ur fyrj uvz, naq
ghearq gur xvatqbz hagb Qnivq gur fba bs Wrffr.

11:1 Gura nyy Vfenry tngurerq gurzfryirf gb Qnivq hagb Uroeba, fnlvat,
Orubyq, jr ner gul obar naq gul syrfu.

11:2 Naq zberbire va gvzr cnfg, rira jura Fnhy jnf xvat, gubh jnfg ur
gung yrqqrfg bhg naq oebhtugrfg va Vfenry: naq gur YBEQ gul Tbq fnvq
hagb gurr, Gubh funyg srrq zl crbcyr Vfenry, naq gubh funyg or ehyre
bire zl crbcyr Vfenry.

11:3 Gurersber pnzr nyy gur ryqref bs Vfenry gb gur xvat gb Uroeba;
naq Qnivq znqr n pbiranag jvgu gurz va Uroeba orsber gur YBEQ; naq
gurl nabvagrq Qnivq xvat bire Vfenry, nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs gur
YBEQ ol Fnzhry.

11:4 Naq Qnivq naq nyy Vfenry jrag gb Wrehfnyrz, juvpu vf Wrohf; jurer
gur Wrohfvgrf jrer, gur vaunovgnagf bs gur ynaq.

11:5 Naq gur vaunovgnagf bs Wrohf fnvq gb Qnivq, Gubh funyg abg pbzr
uvgure. Arireguryrff Qnivq gbbx gur pnfgyr bs Mvba, juvpu vf gur pvgl
bs Qnivq.

11:6 Naq Qnivq fnvq, Jubfbrire fzvgrgu gur Wrohfvgrf svefg funyy or
puvrs naq pncgnva. Fb Wbno gur fba bs Mrehvnu jrag svefg hc, naq jnf
puvrs.

11:7 Naq Qnivq qjryg va gur pnfgyr; gurersber gurl pnyyrq vg gur pvgl
bs Qnivq.

11:8 Naq ur ohvyg gur pvgl ebhaq nobhg, rira sebz Zvyyb ebhaq nobhg:
naq Wbno ercnverq gur erfg bs gur pvgl.

11:9 Fb Qnivq jnkrq terngre naq terngre: sbe gur YBEQ bs ubfgf jnf
jvgu uvz.

11:10 Gurfr nyfb ner gur puvrs bs gur zvtugl zra jubz Qnivq unq, jub
fgeratgurarq gurzfryirf jvgu uvz va uvf xvatqbz, naq jvgu nyy Vfenry,
gb znxr uvz xvat, nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ pbapreavat Vfenry.

11:11 Naq guvf vf gur ahzore bs gur zvtugl zra jubz Qnivq unq;
Wnfubornz, na Unpuzbavgr, gur puvrs bs gur pncgnvaf: ur yvsgrq hc uvf
fcrne ntnvafg guerr uhaqerq fynva ol uvz ng bar gvzr.

11:12 Naq nsgre uvz jnf Ryrnmne gur fba bs Qbqb, gur Nubuvgr, jub jnf
bar bs gur guerr zvtugvrf.

11:13 Ur jnf jvgu Qnivq ng Cnfqnzzvz, naq gurer gur Cuvyvfgvarf jrer
tngurerq gbtrgure gb onggyr, jurer jnf n cnepry bs tebhaq shyy bs
oneyrl; naq gur crbcyr syrq sebz orsber gur Cuvyvfgvarf.

11:14 Naq gurl frg gurzfryirf va gur zvqfg bs gung cnepry, naq
qryvirerq vg, naq fyrj gur Cuvyvfgvarf; naq gur YBEQ fnirq gurz ol n
terng qryvirenapr.

11:15 Abj guerr bs gur guvegl pncgnvaf jrag qbja gb gur ebpx gb Qnivq,
vagb gur pnir bs Nqhyynz; naq gur ubfg bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf rapnzcrq va
gur inyyrl bs Ercunvz.

11:16 Naq Qnivq jnf gura va gur ubyq, naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf' tneevfba
jnf gura ng Orguyrurz.

11:17 Naq Qnivq ybatrq, naq fnvq, Bu gung bar jbhyq tvir zr qevax bs
gur jngre bs gur jryy bs Orguyrurz, gung vf ng gur tngr!  11:18 Naq
gur guerr oenxr guebhtu gur ubfg bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf, naq qerj jngre
bhg bs gur jryy bs Orguyrurz, gung jnf ol gur tngr, naq gbbx vg, naq
oebhtug vg gb Qnivq: ohg Qnivq jbhyq abg qevax bs vg, ohg cbherq vg
bhg gb gur YBEQ.

11:19 Naq fnvq, Zl Tbq sbeovq vg zr, gung V fubhyq qb guvf guvat:
funyy V qevax gur oybbq bs gurfr zra gung unir chg gurve yvirf va
wrbcneql? sbe jvgu gur wrbcneql bs gurve yvirf gurl oebhtug vg.
Gurersber ur jbhyq abg qevax vg.

Gurfr guvatf qvq gurfr guerr zvtugvrfg.

11:20 Naq Novfunv gur oebgure bs Wbno, ur jnf puvrs bs gur guerr: sbe
yvsgvat hc uvf fcrne ntnvafg guerr uhaqerq, ur fyrj gurz, naq unq n
anzr nzbat gur guerr.

11:21 Bs gur guerr, ur jnf zber ubabhenoyr guna gur gjb; sbe ur jnf
gurve pncgnva: ubjorvg ur nggnvarq abg gb gur svefg guerr.

11:22 Oranvnu gur fba bs Wrubvnqn, gur fba bs n inyvnag zna bs
Xnomrry, jub unq qbar znal npgf; ur fyrj gjb yvbayvxr zra bs Zbno:
nyfb ur jrag qbja naq fyrj n yvba va n cvg va n fabjl qnl.

11:23 Naq ur fyrj na Rtlcgvna, n zna bs terng fgngher, svir phovgf
uvtu; naq va gur Rtlcgvna'f unaq jnf n fcrne yvxr n jrnire'f ornz; naq
ur jrag qbja gb uvz jvgu n fgnss, naq cyhpxrq gur fcrne bhg bs gur
Rtlcgvna'f unaq, naq fyrj uvz jvgu uvf bja fcrne.

11:24 Gurfr guvatf qvq Oranvnu gur fba bs Wrubvnqn, naq unq gur anzr
nzbat gur guerr zvtugvrf.

11:25 Orubyq, ur jnf ubabhenoyr nzbat gur guvegl, ohg nggnvarq abg gb
gur svefg guerr: naq Qnivq frg uvz bire uvf thneq.

11:26 Nyfb gur inyvnag zra bs gur nezvrf jrer, Nfnury gur oebgure bs
Wbno, Ryunana gur fba bs Qbqb bs Orguyrurz, 11:27 Funzzbgu gur
Unebevgr, Uryrm gur Crybavgr, 11:28 Ven gur fba bs Vxxrfu gur Grxbvgr,
Novrmre gur Nagbguvgr, 11:29 Fvoorpnv gur Uhfunguvgr, Vynv gur
Nubuvgr, 11:30 Znunenv gur Argbcunguvgr, Uryrq gur fba bs Onnanu gur
Argbcunguvgr, 11:31 Vgunv gur fba bs Evonv bs Tvornu, gung cregnvarq
gb gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva, Oranvnu gur Cvengubavgr, 11:32 Uhenv bs
gur oebbxf bs Tnnfu, Novry gur Neonguvgr, 11:33 Nmznirgu gur
Onunehzvgr, Ryvnuon gur Funnyobavgr, 11:34 Gur fbaf bs Unfurz gur
Tvmbavgr, Wbanguna gur fba bs Funtr gur Unenevgr, 11:35 Nuvnz gur fba
bs Fnpne gur Unenevgr, Ryvcuny gur fba bs He, 11:36 Urcure gur
Zrpurenguvgr, Nuvwnu gur Crybavgr, 11:37 Urmeb gur Pnezryvgr, Annenv
gur fba bs Rmonv, 11:38 Wbry gur oebgure bs Anguna, Zvoune gur fba bs
Unttrev, 11:39 Mryrx gur Nzzbavgr, Anunenv gur Orebguvgr, gur
nezbheornere bs Wbno gur fba bs Mrehvnu, 11:40 Ven gur Vguevgr, Tnero
gur Vguevgr, 11:41 Hevnu gur Uvggvgr, Mnonq gur fba bs Nuynv, 11:42
Nqvan gur fba bs Fuvmn gur Erhoravgr, n pncgnva bs gur Erhoravgrf, naq
guvegl jvgu uvz, 11:43 Unana gur fba bs Znnpunu, naq Wbfuncung gur
Zvguavgr, 11:44 Hmmvn gur Nfugrenguvgr, Funzn naq Wruvry gur fbaf bs
Ubguna gur Nebrevgr, 11:45 Wrqvnry gur fba bs Fuvzev, naq Wbun uvf
oebgure, gur Gvmvgr, 11:46 Ryvry gur Znunivgr, naq Wrevonv, naq
Wbfunivnu, gur fbaf bs Ryannz, naq Vguznu gur Zbnovgr, 11:47 Ryvry,
naq Borq, naq Wnfvry gur Zrfbonvgr.

12:1 Abj gurfr ner gurl gung pnzr gb Qnivq gb Mvxynt, juvyr ur lrg
xrcg uvzfrys pybfr orpnhfr bs Fnhy gur fba bs Xvfu: naq gurl jrer
nzbat gur zvtugl zra, urycref bs gur jne.

12:2 Gurl jrer nezrq jvgu objf, naq pbhyq hfr obgu gur evtug unaq naq
gur yrsg va uheyvat fgbarf naq fubbgvat neebjf bhg bs n obj, rira bs
Fnhy'f oerguera bs Orawnzva.

12:3 Gur puvrs jnf Nuvrmre, gura Wbnfu, gur fbaf bs Furznnu gur
Tvornguvgr; naq Wrmvry, naq Cryrg, gur fbaf bs Nmznirgu; naq Orenpunu,
naq Wruh gur Nagbguvgr.

12:4 Naq Vfznvnu gur Tvorbavgr, n zvtugl zna nzbat gur guvegl, naq
bire gur guvegl; naq Wrerzvnu, naq Wnunmvry, naq Wbunana, naq Wbfnonq
gur Trqrenguvgr, 12:5 Ryhmnv, naq Wrevzbgu, naq Ornyvnu, naq
Furznevnu, naq Furcungvnu gur Unehcuvgr, 12:6 Ryxnanu, naq Wrfvnu, naq
Nmnerry, naq Wbrmre, naq Wnfubornz, gur Xbeuvgrf, 12:7 Naq Wbrynu, naq
Mronqvnu, gur fbaf bs Wrebunz bs Trqbe.

12:8 Naq bs gur Tnqvgrf gurer frcnengrq gurzfryirf hagb Qnivq vagb gur
ubyq gb gur jvyqrearff zra bs zvtug, naq zra bs jne svg sbe gur
onggyr, gung pbhyq unaqyr fuvryq naq ohpxyre, jubfr snprf jrer yvxr
gur snprf bs yvbaf, naq jrer nf fjvsg nf gur ebrf hcba gur zbhagnvaf;
12:9 Rmre gur svefg, Bonqvnu gur frpbaq, Ryvno gur guveq, 12:10
Zvfuznaanu gur sbhegu, Wrerzvnu gur svsgu, 12:11 Nggnv gur fvkgu,
Ryvry gur friragu, 12:12 Wbunana gur rvtugu, Rymnonq gur avagu, 12:13
Wrerzvnu gur gragu, Znpuonanv gur ryriragu.

12:14 Gurfr jrer bs gur fbaf bs Tnq, pncgnvaf bs gur ubfg: bar bs gur
yrnfg jnf bire na uhaqerq, naq gur terngrfg bire n gubhfnaq.

12:15 Gurfr ner gurl gung jrag bire Wbeqna va gur svefg zbagu, jura vg
unq biresybja nyy uvf onaxf; naq gurl chg gb syvtug nyy gurz bs gur
inyyrlf, obgu gbjneq gur rnfg, naq gbjneq gur jrfg.

12:16 Naq gurer pnzr bs gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva naq Whqnu gb gur ubyq
hagb Qnivq.

12:17 Naq Qnivq jrag bhg gb zrrg gurz, naq nafjrerq naq fnvq hagb
gurz, Vs lr or pbzr crnprnoyl hagb zr gb uryc zr, zvar urneg funyy or
xavg hagb lbh: ohg vs lr or pbzr gb orgenl zr gb zvar rarzvrf, frrvat
gurer vf ab jebat va zvar unaqf, gur Tbq bs bhe snguref ybbx gurerba,
naq erohxr vg.

12:18 Gura gur fcvevg pnzr hcba Nznfnv, jub jnf puvrs bs gur pncgnvaf,
naq ur fnvq, Guvar ner jr, Qnivq, naq ba gul fvqr, gubh fba bs Wrffr:
crnpr, crnpr or hagb gurr, naq crnpr or gb guvar urycref; sbe gul Tbq
urycrgu gurr.

Gura Qnivq erprvirq gurz, naq znqr gurz pncgnvaf bs gur onaq.

12:19 Naq gurer sryy fbzr bs Znanffru gb Qnivq, jura ur pnzr jvgu gur
Cuvyvfgvarf ntnvafg Fnhy gb onggyr: ohg gurl urycrq gurz abg: sbe gur
ybeqf bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf hcba nqivfrzrag frag uvz njnl, fnlvat, Ur
jvyy snyy gb uvf znfgre Fnhy gb gur wrbcneql bs bhe urnqf.

12:20 Nf ur jrag gb Mvxynt, gurer sryy gb uvz bs Znanffru, Nqanu, naq
Wbmnonq, naq Wrqvnry, naq Zvpunry, naq Wbmnonq, naq Ryvuh, naq
Mvygunv, pncgnvaf bs gur gubhfnaqf gung jrer bs Znanffru.

12:21 Naq gurl urycrq Qnivq ntnvafg gur onaq bs gur ebiref: sbe gurl
jrer nyy zvtugl zra bs inybhe, naq jrer pncgnvaf va gur ubfg.

12:22 Sbe ng gung gvzr qnl ol qnl gurer pnzr gb Qnivq gb uryc uvz,
hagvy vg jnf n terng ubfg, yvxr gur ubfg bs Tbq.

12:23 Naq gurfr ner gur ahzoref bs gur onaqf gung jrer ernql nezrq gb
gur jne, naq pnzr gb Qnivq gb Uroeba, gb ghea gur xvatqbz bs Fnhy gb
uvz, nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ.

12:24 Gur puvyqera bs Whqnu gung oner fuvryq naq fcrne jrer fvk
gubhfnaq naq rvtug uhaqerq, ernql nezrq gb gur jne.

12:25 Bs gur puvyqera bs Fvzrba, zvtugl zra bs inybhe sbe gur jne,
frira gubhfnaq naq bar uhaqerq.

12:26 Bs gur puvyqera bs Yriv sbhe gubhfnaq naq fvk uhaqerq.

12:27 Naq Wrubvnqn jnf gur yrnqre bs gur Nnebavgrf, naq jvgu uvz jrer
guerr gubhfnaq naq frira uhaqerq; 12:28 Naq Mnqbx, n lbhat zna zvtugl
bs inybhe, naq bs uvf sngure'f ubhfr gjragl naq gjb pncgnvaf.

12:29 Naq bs gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva, gur xvaqerq bs Fnhy, guerr
gubhfnaq: sbe uvguregb gur terngrfg cneg bs gurz unq xrcg gur jneq bs
gur ubhfr bs Fnhy.

12:30 Naq bs gur puvyqera bs Rcuenvz gjragl gubhfnaq naq rvtug
uhaqerq, zvtugl zra bs inybhe, snzbhf guebhtubhg gur ubhfr bs gurve
snguref.

12:31 Naq bs gur unys gevor bs Znanffru rvtugrra gubhfnaq, juvpu jrer
rkcerffrq ol anzr, gb pbzr naq znxr Qnivq xvat.

12:32 Naq bs gur puvyqera bs Vffnpune, juvpu jrer zra gung unq
haqrefgnaqvat bs gur gvzrf, gb xabj jung Vfenry bhtug gb qb; gur urnqf
bs gurz jrer gjb uhaqerq; naq nyy gurve oerguera jrer ng gurve
pbzznaqzrag.

12:33 Bs Mrohyha, fhpu nf jrag sbegu gb onggyr, rkcreg va jne, jvgu
nyy vafgehzragf bs jne, svsgl gubhfnaq, juvpu pbhyq xrrc enax: gurl
jrer abg bs qbhoyr urneg.

12:34 Naq bs Ancugnyv n gubhfnaq pncgnvaf, naq jvgu gurz jvgu fuvryq
naq fcrne guvegl naq frira gubhfnaq.

12:35 Naq bs gur Qnavgrf rkcreg va jne gjragl naq rvtug gubhfnaq naq
fvk uhaqerq.

12:36 Naq bs Nfure, fhpu nf jrag sbegu gb onggyr, rkcreg va jne, sbegl
gubhfnaq.

12:37 Naq ba gur bgure fvqr bs Wbeqna, bs gur Erhoravgrf, naq gur
Tnqvgrf, naq bs gur unys gevor bs Znanffru, jvgu nyy znaare bs
vafgehzragf bs jne sbe gur onggyr, na uhaqerq naq gjragl gubhfnaq.

12:38 Nyy gurfr zra bs jne, gung pbhyq xrrc enax, pnzr jvgu n cresrpg
urneg gb Uroeba, gb znxr Qnivq xvat bire nyy Vfenry: naq nyy gur erfg
nyfb bs Vfenry jrer bs bar urneg gb znxr Qnivq xvat.

12:39 Naq gurer gurl jrer jvgu Qnivq guerr qnlf, rngvat naq qevaxvat:
sbe gurve oerguera unq cercnerq sbe gurz.

12:40 Zberbire gurl gung jrer avtu gurz, rira hagb Vffnpune naq
Mrohyha naq Ancugnyv, oebhtug oernq ba nffrf, naq ba pnzryf, naq ba
zhyrf, naq ba bkra, naq zrng, zrny, pnxrf bs svtf, naq ohapurf bs
envfvaf, naq jvar, naq bvy, naq bkra, naq furrc nohaqnagyl: sbe gurer
jnf wbl va Vfenry.

13:1 Naq Qnivq pbafhygrq jvgu gur pncgnvaf bs gubhfnaqf naq uhaqerqf,
naq jvgu rirel yrnqre.

13:2 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb nyy gur pbatertngvba bs Vfenry, Vs vg frrz
tbbq hagb lbh, naq gung vg or bs gur YBEQ bhe Tbq, yrg hf fraq noebnq
hagb bhe oerguera rirel jurer, gung ner yrsg va nyy gur ynaq bs
Vfenry, naq jvgu gurz nyfb gb gur cevrfgf naq Yrivgrf juvpu ner va
gurve pvgvrf naq fhoheof, gung gurl znl tngure gurzfryirf hagb hf:
13:3 Naq yrg hf oevat ntnva gur nex bs bhe Tbq gb hf: sbe jr radhverq
abg ng vg va gur qnlf bs Fnhy.

13:4 Naq nyy gur pbatertngvba fnvq gung gurl jbhyq qb fb: sbe gur
guvat jnf evtug va gur rlrf bs nyy gur crbcyr.

13:5 Fb Qnivq tngurerq nyy Vfenry gbtrgure, sebz Fuvube bs Rtlcg rira
hagb gur ragrevat bs Urzngu, gb oevat gur nex bs Tbq sebz
Xvewnguwrnevz.

13:6 Naq Qnivq jrag hc, naq nyy Vfenry, gb Onnynu, gung vf, gb
Xvewnguwrnevz, juvpu orybatrq gb Whqnu, gb oevat hc gurapr gur nex bs
Tbq gur YBEQ, gung qjryyrgu orgjrra gur purehovzf, jubfr anzr vf
pnyyrq ba vg.

13:7 Naq gurl pneevrq gur nex bs Tbq va n arj pneg bhg bs gur ubhfr bs
Novanqno: naq Hmmn naq Nuvb qenir gur pneg.

13:8 Naq Qnivq naq nyy Vfenry cynlrq orsber Tbq jvgu nyy gurve zvtug,
naq jvgu fvatvat, naq jvgu unecf, naq jvgu cfnygrevrf, naq jvgu
gvzoeryf, naq jvgu plzonyf, naq jvgu gehzcrgf.

13:9 Naq jura gurl pnzr hagb gur guerfuvatsybbe bs Puvqba, Hmmn chg
sbegu uvf unaq gb ubyq gur nex; sbe gur bkra fghzoyrq.

13:10 Naq gur natre bs gur YBEQ jnf xvaqyrq ntnvafg Hmmn, naq ur fzbgr
uvz, orpnhfr ur chg uvf unaq gb gur nex: naq gurer ur qvrq orsber Tbq.

13:11 Naq Qnivq jnf qvfcyrnfrq, orpnhfr gur YBEQ unq znqr n oernpu
hcba Hmmn: jurersber gung cynpr vf pnyyrq Crermhmmn gb guvf qnl.

13:12 Naq Qnivq jnf nsenvq bs Tbq gung qnl, fnlvat, Ubj funyy V oevat
gur nex bs Tbq ubzr gb zr?  13:13 Fb Qnivq oebhtug abg gur nex ubzr gb
uvzfrys gb gur pvgl bs Qnivq, ohg pneevrq vg nfvqr vagb gur ubhfr bs
Borqrqbz gur Tvggvgr.

13:14 Naq gur nex bs Tbq erznvarq jvgu gur snzvyl bs Borqrqbz va uvf
ubhfr guerr zbaguf. Naq gur YBEQ oyrffrq gur ubhfr bs Borqrqbz, naq
nyy gung ur unq.

14:1 Abj Uvenz xvat bs Gler frag zrffratref gb Qnivq, naq gvzore bs
prqnef, jvgu znfbaf naq pnecragref, gb ohvyq uvz na ubhfr.

14:2 Naq Qnivq creprvirq gung gur YBEQ unq pbasvezrq uvz xvat bire
Vfenry, sbe uvf xvatqbz jnf yvsgrq hc ba uvtu, orpnhfr bs uvf crbcyr
Vfenry.

14:3 Naq Qnivq gbbx zber jvirf ng Wrehfnyrz: naq Qnivq ortng zber fbaf
naq qnhtugref.

14:4 Abj gurfr ner gur anzrf bs uvf puvyqera juvpu ur unq va
Wrehfnyrz; Funzzhn, naq Fubono, Anguna, naq Fbybzba, 14:5 Naq Voune,
naq Ryvfuhn, naq Rycnyrg, 14:6 Naq Abtnu, naq Arcurt, naq Wncuvn, 14:7
Naq Ryvfunzn, naq Orryvnqn, naq Ryvcunyrg.

14:8 Naq jura gur Cuvyvfgvarf urneq gung Qnivq jnf nabvagrq xvat bire
nyy Vfenry, nyy gur Cuvyvfgvarf jrag hc gb frrx Qnivq. Naq Qnivq urneq
bs vg, naq jrag bhg ntnvafg gurz.

14:9 Naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf pnzr naq fcernq gurzfryirf va gur inyyrl bs
Ercunvz.

14:10 Naq Qnivq radhverq bs Tbq, fnlvat, Funyy V tb hc ntnvafg gur
Cuvyvfgvarf? Naq jvyg gubh qryvire gurz vagb zvar unaq? Naq gur YBEQ
fnvq hagb uvz, Tb hc; sbe V jvyy qryvire gurz vagb guvar unaq.

14:11 Fb gurl pnzr hc gb Onnycrenmvz; naq Qnivq fzbgr gurz gurer. Gura
Qnivq fnvq, Tbq ungu oebxra va hcba zvar rarzvrf ol zvar unaq yvxr gur
oernxvat sbegu bs jngref: gurersber gurl pnyyrq gur anzr bs gung cynpr
Onnycrenmvz.

14:12 Naq jura gurl unq yrsg gurve tbqf gurer, Qnivq tnir n
pbzznaqzrag, naq gurl jrer ohearq jvgu sver.

14:13 Naq gur Cuvyvfgvarf lrg ntnva fcernq gurzfryirf noebnq va gur
inyyrl.

14:14 Gurersber Qnivq radhverq ntnva bs Tbq; naq Tbq fnvq hagb uvz, Tb
abg hc nsgre gurz; ghea njnl sebz gurz, naq pbzr hcba gurz bire
ntnvafg gur zhyoreel gerrf.

14:15 Naq vg funyy or, jura gubh funyg urne n fbhaq bs tbvat va gur
gbcf bs gur zhyoreel gerrf, gung gura gubh funyg tb bhg gb onggyr: sbe
Tbq vf tbar sbegu orsber gurr gb fzvgr gur ubfg bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf.

14:16 Qnivq gurersber qvq nf Tbq pbzznaqrq uvz: naq gurl fzbgr gur
ubfg bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf sebz Tvorba rira gb Tnmre.

14:17 Naq gur snzr bs Qnivq jrag bhg vagb nyy ynaqf; naq gur YBEQ
oebhtug gur srne bs uvz hcba nyy angvbaf.

15:1 Naq Qnivq znqr uvz ubhfrf va gur pvgl bs Qnivq, naq cercnerq n
cynpr sbe gur nex bs Tbq, naq cvgpurq sbe vg n grag.

15:2 Gura Qnivq fnvq, Abar bhtug gb pneel gur nex bs Tbq ohg gur
Yrivgrf: sbe gurz ungu gur YBEQ pubfra gb pneel gur nex bs Tbq, naq gb
zvavfgre hagb uvz sbe rire.

15:3 Naq Qnivq tngurerq nyy Vfenry gbtrgure gb Wrehfnyrz, gb oevat hc
gur nex bs gur YBEQ hagb uvf cynpr, juvpu ur unq cercnerq sbe vg.

15:4 Naq Qnivq nffrzoyrq gur puvyqera bs Nneba, naq gur Yrivgrf: 15:5
Bs gur fbaf bs Xbungu; Hevry gur puvrs, naq uvf oerguera na uhaqerq
naq gjragl: 15:6 Bs gur fbaf bs Zrenev; Nfnvnu gur puvrs, naq uvf
oerguera gjb uhaqerq naq gjragl: 15:7 Bs gur fbaf bs Trefubz; Wbry gur
puvrs naq uvf oerguera na uhaqerq naq guvegl: 15:8 Bs gur fbaf bs
Ryvmncuna; Furznvnu gur puvrs, naq uvf oerguera gjb uhaqerq: 15:9 Bs
gur fbaf bs Uroeba; Ryvry gur puvrs, naq uvf oerguera sbhefpber: 15:10
Bs gur fbaf bs Hmmvry; Nzzvanqno gur puvrs, naq uvf oerguera na
uhaqerq naq gjryir.

15:11 Naq Qnivq pnyyrq sbe Mnqbx naq Novngune gur cevrfgf, naq sbe gur
Yrivgrf, sbe Hevry, Nfnvnu, naq Wbry, Furznvnu, naq Ryvry, naq
Nzzvanqno, 15:12 Naq fnvq hagb gurz, Lr ner gur puvrs bs gur snguref
bs gur Yrivgrf: fnapgvsl lbhefryirf, obgu lr naq lbhe oerguera, gung
lr znl oevat hc gur nex bs gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry hagb gur cynpr gung
V unir cercnerq sbe vg.

15:13 Sbe orpnhfr lr qvq vg abg ng gur svefg, gur YBEQ bhe Tbq znqr n
oernpu hcba hf, sbe gung jr fbhtug uvz abg nsgre gur qhr beqre.

15:14 Fb gur cevrfgf naq gur Yrivgrf fnapgvsvrq gurzfryirf gb oevat hc
gur nex bs gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry.

15:15 Naq gur puvyqera bs gur Yrivgrf oner gur nex bs Tbq hcba gurve
fubhyqref jvgu gur fgnirf gurerba, nf Zbfrf pbzznaqrq nppbeqvat gb gur
jbeq bs gur YBEQ.

15:16 Naq Qnivq fcnxr gb gur puvrs bs gur Yrivgrf gb nccbvag gurve
oerguera gb or gur fvatref jvgu vafgehzragf bs zhfvpx, cfnygrevrf naq
unecf naq plzonyf, fbhaqvat, ol yvsgvat hc gur ibvpr jvgu wbl.

15:17 Fb gur Yrivgrf nccbvagrq Urzna gur fba bs Wbry; naq bs uvf
oerguera, Nfncu gur fba bs Orerpuvnu; naq bs gur fbaf bs Zrenev gurve
oerguera, Rguna gur fba bs Xhfunvnu; 15:18 Naq jvgu gurz gurve
oerguera bs gur frpbaq qrterr, Mrpunevnu, Ora, naq Wnnmvry, naq
Furzvenzbgu, naq Wruvry, naq Haav, Ryvno, naq Oranvnu, naq Znnfrvnu,
naq Znggvguvnu, naq Ryvcuryru, naq Zvxarvnu, naq Borqrqbz, naq Wrvry,
gur cbegref.

15:19 Fb gur fvatref, Urzna, Nfncu, naq Rguna, jrer nccbvagrq gb fbhaq
jvgu plzonyf bs oenff; 15:20 Naq Mrpunevnu, naq Nmvry, naq
Furzvenzbgu, naq Wruvry, naq Haav, naq Ryvno, naq Znnfrvnu, naq
Oranvnu, jvgu cfnygrevrf ba Nynzbgu; 15:21 Naq Znggvguvnu, naq
Ryvcuryru, naq Zvxarvnu, naq Borqrqbz, naq Wrvry, naq Nmnmvnu, jvgu
unecf ba gur Furzvavgu gb rkpry.

15:22 Naq Puranavnu, puvrs bs gur Yrivgrf, jnf sbe fbat: ur vafgehpgrq
nobhg gur fbat, orpnhfr ur jnf fxvyshy.

15:23 Naq Orerpuvnu naq Ryxnanu jrer qbbexrrcref sbe gur nex.

15:24 Naq Furonavnu, naq Wrubfuncung, naq Argunarry, naq Nznfnv, naq
Mrpunevnu, naq Oranvnu, naq Ryvrmre, gur cevrfgf, qvq oybj jvgu gur
gehzcrgf orsber gur nex bs Tbq: naq Borqrqbz naq Wruvnu jrer
qbbexrrcref sbe gur nex.

15:25 Fb Qnivq, naq gur ryqref bs Vfenry, naq gur pncgnvaf bire
gubhfnaqf, jrag gb oevat hc gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ bhg bs
gur ubhfr bs Borqrqbz jvgu wbl.

15:26 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Tbq urycrq gur Yrivgrf gung oner gur
nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ, gung gurl bssrerq frira ohyybpxf naq
frira enzf.

15:27 Naq Qnivq jnf pybgurq jvgu n ebor bs svar yvara, naq nyy gur
Yrivgrf gung oner gur nex, naq gur fvatref, naq Puranavnu gur znfgre
bs gur fbat jvgu gur fvatref: Qnivq nyfb unq hcba uvz na rcubq bs
yvara.

15:28 Guhf nyy Vfenry oebhtug hc gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ
jvgu fubhgvat, naq jvgu fbhaq bs gur pbearg, naq jvgu gehzcrgf, naq
jvgu plzonyf, znxvat n abvfr jvgu cfnygrevrf naq unecf.

15:29 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ pnzr
gb gur pvgl bs Qnivq, gung Zvpuny, gur qnhtugre bs Fnhy ybbxvat bhg ng
n jvaqbj fnj xvat Qnivq qnapvat naq cynlvat: naq fur qrfcvfrq uvz va
ure urneg.

16:1 Fb gurl oebhtug gur nex bs Tbq, naq frg vg va gur zvqfg bs gur
grag gung Qnivq unq cvgpurq sbe vg: naq gurl bssrerq oheag fnpevsvprf
naq crnpr bssrevatf orsber Tbq.

16:2 Naq jura Qnivq unq znqr na raq bs bssrevat gur oheag bssrevatf
naq gur crnpr bssrevatf, ur oyrffrq gur crbcyr va gur anzr bs gur
YBEQ.

16:3 Naq ur qrnyg gb rirel bar bs Vfenry, obgu zna naq jbzna, gb rirel
bar n ybns bs oernq, naq n tbbq cvrpr bs syrfu, naq n syntba bs jvar.

16:4 Naq ur nccbvagrq pregnva bs gur Yrivgrf gb zvavfgre orsber gur
nex bs gur YBEQ, naq gb erpbeq, naq gb gunax naq cenvfr gur YBEQ Tbq
bs Vfenry: 16:5 Nfncu gur puvrs, naq arkg gb uvz Mrpunevnu, Wrvry, naq
Furzvenzbgu, naq Wruvry, naq Znggvguvnu, naq Ryvno, naq Oranvnu, naq
Borqrqbz: naq Wrvry jvgu cfnygrevrf naq jvgu unecf; ohg Nfncu znqr n
fbhaq jvgu plzonyf; 16:6 Oranvnu nyfb naq Wnunmvry gur cevrfgf jvgu
gehzcrgf pbagvahnyyl orsber gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs Tbq.

16:7 Gura ba gung qnl Qnivq qryvirerq svefg guvf cfnyz gb gunax gur
YBEQ vagb gur unaq bs Nfncu naq uvf oerguera.

16:8 Tvir gunaxf hagb gur YBEQ, pnyy hcba uvf anzr, znxr xabja uvf
qrrqf nzbat gur crbcyr.

16:9 Fvat hagb uvz, fvat cfnyzf hagb uvz, gnyx lr bs nyy uvf jbaqebhf
jbexf.

16:10 Tybel lr va uvf ubyl anzr: yrg gur urneg bs gurz erwbvpr gung
frrx gur YBEQ.

16:11 Frrx gur YBEQ naq uvf fgeratgu, frrx uvf snpr pbagvahnyyl.

16:12 Erzrzore uvf zneiryybhf jbexf gung ur ungu qbar, uvf jbaqref,
naq gur whqtzragf bs uvf zbhgu; 16:13 B lr frrq bs Vfenry uvf freinag,
lr puvyqera bs Wnpbo, uvf pubfra barf.

16:14 Ur vf gur YBEQ bhe Tbq; uvf whqtzragf ner va nyy gur rnegu.

16:15 Or lr zvaqshy nyjnlf bs uvf pbiranag; gur jbeq juvpu ur
pbzznaqrq gb n gubhfnaq trarengvbaf; 16:16 Rira bs gur pbiranag juvpu
ur znqr jvgu Noenunz, naq bs uvf bngu hagb Vfnnp; 16:17 Naq ungu
pbasvezrq gur fnzr gb Wnpbo sbe n ynj, naq gb Vfenry sbe na
rireynfgvat pbiranag, 16:18 Fnlvat, Hagb gurr jvyy V tvir gur ynaq bs
Pnanna, gur ybg bs lbhe vaurevgnapr; 16:19 Jura lr jrer ohg srj, rira
n srj, naq fgenatref va vg.

16:20 Naq jura gurl jrag sebz angvba gb angvba, naq sebz bar xvatqbz
gb nabgure crbcyr; 16:21 Ur fhssrerq ab zna gb qb gurz jebat: lrn, ur
ercebirq xvatf sbe gurve fnxrf, 16:22 Fnlvat, Gbhpu abg zvar nabvagrq,
naq qb zl cebcurgf ab unez.

16:23 Fvat hagb gur YBEQ, nyy gur rnegu; furj sbegu sebz qnl gb qnl
uvf fnyingvba.

16:24 Qrpyner uvf tybel nzbat gur urngura; uvf zneiryybhf jbexf nzbat
nyy angvbaf.

16:25 Sbe terng vf gur YBEQ, naq terngyl gb or cenvfrq: ur nyfb vf gb
or srnerq nobir nyy tbqf.

16:26 Sbe nyy gur tbqf bs gur crbcyr ner vqbyf: ohg gur YBEQ znqr gur
urniraf.

16:27 Tybel naq ubabhe ner va uvf cerfrapr; fgeratgu naq tynqarff ner
va uvf cynpr.

16:28 Tvir hagb gur YBEQ, lr xvaqerqf bs gur crbcyr, tvir hagb gur
YBEQ tybel naq fgeratgu.

16:29 Tvir hagb gur YBEQ gur tybel qhr hagb uvf anzr: oevat na
bssrevat, naq pbzr orsber uvz: jbefuvc gur YBEQ va gur ornhgl bs
ubyvarff.

16:30 Srne orsber uvz, nyy gur rnegu: gur jbeyq nyfb funyy or fgnoyr,
gung vg or abg zbirq.

16:31 Yrg gur urniraf or tynq, naq yrg gur rnegu erwbvpr: naq yrg zra
fnl nzbat gur angvbaf, Gur YBEQ ervtargu.

16:32 Yrg gur frn ebne, naq gur shyarff gurerbs: yrg gur svryqf
erwbvpr, naq nyy gung vf gurerva.

16:33 Gura funyy gur gerrf bs gur jbbq fvat bhg ng gur cerfrapr bs gur
YBEQ, orpnhfr ur pbzrgu gb whqtr gur rnegu.

16:34 B tvir gunaxf hagb gur YBEQ; sbe ur vf tbbq; sbe uvf zrepl
raqhergu sbe rire.

16:35 Naq fnl lr, Fnir hf, B Tbq bs bhe fnyingvba, naq tngure hf
gbtrgure, naq qryvire hf sebz gur urngura, gung jr znl tvir gunaxf gb
gul ubyl anzr, naq tybel va gul cenvfr.

16:36 Oyrffrq or gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry sbe rire naq rire. Naq nyy gur
crbcyr fnvq, Nzra, naq cenvfrq gur YBEQ.

16:37 Fb ur yrsg gurer orsber gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ
Nfncu naq uvf oerguera, gb zvavfgre orsber gur nex pbagvahnyyl, nf
rirel qnl'f jbex erdhverq: 16:38 Naq Borqrqbz jvgu gurve oerguera,
guerrfpber naq rvtug; Borqrqbz nyfb gur fba bs Wrqhguha naq Ubfnu gb
or cbegref: 16:39 Naq Mnqbx gur cevrfg, naq uvf oerguera gur cevrfgf,
orsber gur gnoreanpyr bs gur YBEQ va gur uvtu cynpr gung jnf ng
Tvorba, 16:40 Gb bssre oheag bssrevatf hagb gur YBEQ hcba gur nygne bs
gur oheag bssrevat pbagvahnyyl zbeavat naq riravat, naq gb qb
nppbeqvat gb nyy gung vf jevggra va gur ynj bs gur YBEQ, juvpu ur
pbzznaqrq Vfenry; 16:41 Naq jvgu gurz Urzna naq Wrqhguha, naq gur erfg
gung jrer pubfra, jub jrer rkcerffrq ol anzr, gb tvir gunaxf gb gur
YBEQ, orpnhfr uvf zrepl raqhergu sbe rire; 16:42 Naq jvgu gurz Urzna
naq Wrqhguha jvgu gehzcrgf naq plzonyf sbe gubfr gung fubhyq znxr n
fbhaq, naq jvgu zhfvpny vafgehzragf bs Tbq. Naq gur fbaf bs Wrqhguha
jrer cbegref.

16:43 Naq nyy gur crbcyr qrcnegrq rirel zna gb uvf ubhfr: naq Qnivq
erghearq gb oyrff uvf ubhfr.

17:1 Abj vg pnzr gb cnff, nf Qnivq fng va uvf ubhfr, gung Qnivq fnvq
gb Anguna gur cebcurg, Yb, V qjryy va na ubhfr bs prqnef, ohg gur nex
bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ erznvargu haqre phegnvaf.

17:2 Gura Anguna fnvq hagb Qnivq, Qb nyy gung vf va guvar urneg; sbe
Tbq vf jvgu gurr.

17:3 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff gur fnzr avtug, gung gur jbeq bs Tbq pnzr gb
Anguna, fnlvat, 17:4 Tb naq gryy Qnivq zl freinag, Guhf fnvgu gur
YBEQ, Gubh funyg abg ohvyq zr na ubhfr gb qjryy va: 17:5 Sbe V unir
abg qjryg va na ubhfr fvapr gur qnl gung V oebhtug hc Vfenry hagb guvf
qnl; ohg unir tbar sebz grag gb grag, naq sebz bar gnoreanpyr gb
nabgure.

17:6 Jurerfbrire V unir jnyxrq jvgu nyy Vfenry, fcnxr V n jbeq gb nal
bs gur whqtrf bs Vfenry, jubz V pbzznaqrq gb srrq zl crbcyr, fnlvat,
Jul unir lr abg ohvyg zr na ubhfr bs prqnef?  17:7 Abj gurersber guhf
funyg gubh fnl hagb zl freinag Qnivq, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ bs ubfgf, V
gbbx gurr sebz gur furrcpbgr, rira sebz sbyybjvat gur furrc, gung gubh
fubhyqrfg or ehyre bire zl crbcyr Vfenry: 17:8 Naq V unir orra jvgu
gurr juvgurefbrire gubh unfg jnyxrq, naq unir phg bss nyy guvar
rarzvrf sebz orsber gurr, naq unir znqr gurr n anzr yvxr gur anzr bs
gur terng zra gung ner va gur rnegu.

17:9 Nyfb V jvyy beqnva n cynpr sbe zl crbcyr Vfenry, naq jvyy cynag
gurz, naq gurl funyy qjryy va gurve cynpr, naq funyy or zbirq ab zber;
arvgure funyy gur puvyqera bs jvpxrqarff jnfgr gurz nal zber, nf ng
gur ortvaavat, 17:10 Naq fvapr gur gvzr gung V pbzznaqrq whqtrf gb or
bire zl crbcyr Vfenry. Zberbire V jvyy fhoqhr nyy guvar rarzvrf.
Shegurezber V gryy gurr gung gur YBEQ jvyy ohvyq gurr na ubhfr.

17:11 Naq vg funyy pbzr gb cnff, jura gul qnlf or rkcverq gung gubh
zhfg tb gb or jvgu gul snguref, gung V jvyy envfr hc gul frrq nsgre
gurr, juvpu funyy or bs gul fbaf; naq V jvyy rfgnoyvfu uvf xvatqbz.

17:12 Ur funyy ohvyq zr na ubhfr, naq V jvyy fgnoyvfu uvf guebar sbe
rire.

17:13 V jvyy or uvf sngure, naq ur funyy or zl fba: naq V jvyy abg
gnxr zl zrepl njnl sebz uvz, nf V gbbx vg sebz uvz gung jnf orsber
gurr: 17:14 Ohg V jvyy frggyr uvz va zvar ubhfr naq va zl xvatqbz sbe
rire: naq uvf guebar funyy or rfgnoyvfurq sbe rirezber.

17:15 Nppbeqvat gb nyy gurfr jbeqf, naq nppbeqvat gb nyy guvf ivfvba,
fb qvq Anguna fcrnx hagb Qnivq.

17:16 Naq Qnivq gur xvat pnzr naq fng orsber gur YBEQ, naq fnvq, Jub
nz V, B YBEQ Tbq, naq jung vf zvar ubhfr, gung gubh unfg oebhtug zr
uvguregb?  17:17 Naq lrg guvf jnf n fznyy guvat va guvar rlrf, B Tbq;
sbe gubh unfg nyfb fcbxra bs gul freinag'f ubhfr sbe n terng juvyr gb
pbzr, naq unfg ertneqrq zr nppbeqvat gb gur rfgngr bs n zna bs uvtu
qrterr, B YBEQ Tbq.

17:18 Jung pna Qnivq fcrnx zber gb gurr sbe gur ubabhe bs gul freinag?
sbe gubh xabjrfg gul freinag.

17:19 B YBEQ, sbe gul freinag'f fnxr, naq nppbeqvat gb guvar bja
urneg, unfg gubh qbar nyy guvf terngarff, va znxvat xabja nyy gurfr
terng guvatf.

17:20 B YBEQ, gurer vf abar yvxr gurr, arvgure vf gurer nal Tbq orfvqr
gurr, nppbeqvat gb nyy gung jr unir urneq jvgu bhe rnef.

17:21 Naq jung bar angvba va gur rnegu vf yvxr gul crbcyr Vfenry, jubz
Tbq jrag gb erqrrz gb or uvf bja crbcyr, gb znxr gurr n anzr bs
terngarff naq greevoyrarff, ol qevivat bhg angvbaf sebz orsber gul
crbcyr jubz gubh unfg erqrrzrq bhg bs Rtlcg?  17:22 Sbe gul crbcyr
Vfenry qvqfg gubh znxr guvar bja crbcyr sbe rire; naq gubh, YBEQ,
orpnzrfg gurve Tbq.

17:23 Gurersber abj, YBEQ, yrg gur guvat gung gubh unfg fcbxra
pbapreavat gul freinag naq pbapreavat uvf ubhfr or rfgnoyvfurq sbe
rire, naq qb nf gubh unfg fnvq.

17:24 Yrg vg rira or rfgnoyvfurq, gung gul anzr znl or zntavsvrq sbe
rire, fnlvat, Gur YBEQ bs ubfgf vf gur Tbq bs Vfenry, rira n Tbq gb
Vfenry: naq yrg gur ubhfr bs Qnivq gul freinag or rfgnoyvfurq orsber
gurr.

17:25 Sbe gubh, B zl Tbq, unfg gbyq gul freinag gung gubh jvyg ohvyq
uvz na ubhfr: gurersber gul freinag ungu sbhaq va uvf urneg gb cenl
orsber gurr.

17:26 Naq abj, YBEQ, gubh neg Tbq, naq unfg cebzvfrq guvf tbbqarff
hagb gul freinag: 17:27 Abj gurersber yrg vg cyrnfr gurr gb oyrff gur
ubhfr bs gul freinag, gung vg znl or orsber gurr sbe rire: sbe gubh
oyrffrfg, B YBEQ, naq vg funyy or oyrffrq sbe rire.

18:1 Abj nsgre guvf vg pnzr gb cnff, gung Qnivq fzbgr gur Cuvyvfgvarf,
naq fhoqhrq gurz, naq gbbx Tngu naq ure gbjaf bhg bs gur unaq bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf.

18:2 Naq ur fzbgr Zbno; naq gur Zbnovgrf orpnzr Qnivq'f freinagf, naq
oebhtug tvsgf.

18:3 Naq Qnivq fzbgr Unqnermre xvat bs Mbonu hagb Unzngu, nf ur jrag
gb fgnoyvfu uvf qbzvavba ol gur evire Rhcuengrf.

18:4 Naq Qnivq gbbx sebz uvz n gubhfnaq punevbgf, naq frira gubhfnaq
ubefrzra, naq gjragl gubhfnaq sbbgzra: Qnivq nyfb ubhturq nyy gur
punevbg ubefrf, ohg erfreirq bs gurz na uhaqerq punevbgf.

18:5 Naq jura gur Flevnaf bs Qnznfphf pnzr gb uryc Unqnermre xvat bs
Mbonu, Qnivq fyrj bs gur Flevnaf gjb naq gjragl gubhfnaq zra.

18:6 Gura Qnivq chg tneevfbaf va Flevnqnznfphf; naq gur Flevnaf orpnzr
Qnivq'f freinagf, naq oebhtug tvsgf. Guhf gur YBEQ cerfreirq Qnivq
juvgurefbrire ur jrag.

18:7 Naq Qnivq gbbx gur fuvryqf bs tbyq gung jrer ba gur freinagf bs
Unqnermre, naq oebhtug gurz gb Wrehfnyrz.

18:8 Yvxrjvfr sebz Gvoungu, naq sebz Puha, pvgvrf bs Unqnermre,
oebhtug Qnivq irel zhpu oenff, jurerjvgu Fbybzba znqr gur oenfra frn,
naq gur cvyynef, naq gur irffryf bs oenff.

18:9 Abj jura Gbh xvat bs Unzngu urneq ubj Qnivq unq fzvggra nyy gur
ubfg bs Unqnermre xvat bs Mbonu; 18:10 Ur frag Unqbenz uvf fba gb xvat
Qnivq, gb radhver bs uvf jrysner, naq gb pbatenghyngr uvz, orpnhfr ur
unq sbhtug ntnvafg Unqnermre, naq fzvggra uvz; (sbe Unqnermre unq jne
jvgu Gbh;) naq jvgu uvz nyy znaare bs irffryf bs tbyq naq fvyire naq
oenff.

18:11 Gurz nyfb xvat Qnivq qrqvpngrq hagb gur YBEQ, jvgu gur fvyire
naq gur tbyq gung ur oebhtug sebz nyy gurfr angvbaf; sebz Rqbz, naq
sebz Zbno, naq sebz gur puvyqera bs Nzzba, naq sebz gur Cuvyvfgvarf,
naq sebz Nznyrx.

18:12 Zberbire Novfunv gur fba bs Mrehvnu fyrj bs gur Rqbzvgrf va gur
inyyrl bs fnyg rvtugrra gubhfnaq.

18:13 Naq ur chg tneevfbaf va Rqbz; naq nyy gur Rqbzvgrf orpnzr
Qnivq'f freinagf. Guhf gur YBEQ cerfreirq Qnivq juvgurefbrire ur jrag.

18:14 Fb Qnivq ervtarq bire nyy Vfenry, naq rkrphgrq whqtzrag naq
whfgvpr nzbat nyy uvf crbcyr.

18:15 Naq Wbno gur fba bs Mrehvnu jnf bire gur ubfg; naq Wrubfuncung
gur fba bs Nuvyhq, erpbeqre.

18:16 Naq Mnqbx gur fba bs Nuvgho, naq Novzryrpu gur fba bs Novngune,
jrer gur cevrfgf; naq Funifun jnf fpevor; 18:17 Naq Oranvnu gur fba bs
Wrubvnqn jnf bire gur Purerguvgrf naq gur Cryrguvgrf; naq gur fbaf bs
Qnivq jrer puvrs nobhg gur xvat.

19:1 Abj vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre guvf, gung Anunfu gur xvat bs gur
puvyqera bs Nzzba qvrq, naq uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

19:2 Naq Qnivq fnvq, V jvyy furj xvaqarff hagb Unaha gur fba bs
Anunfu, orpnhfr uvf sngure furjrq xvaqarff gb zr. Naq Qnivq frag
zrffratref gb pbzsbeg uvz pbapreavat uvf sngure. Fb gur freinagf bs
Qnivq pnzr vagb gur ynaq bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba gb Unaha, gb pbzsbeg
uvz.

19:3 Ohg gur cevaprf bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba fnvq gb Unaha, Guvaxrfg
gubh gung Qnivq qbgu ubabhe gul sngure, gung ur ungu frag pbzsbegref
hagb gurr?  ner abg uvf freinagf pbzr hagb gurr sbe gb frnepu, naq gb
bireguebj, naq gb fcl bhg gur ynaq?  19:4 Jurersber Unaha gbbx Qnivq'f
freinagf, naq funirq gurz, naq phg bss gurve tnezragf va gur zvqfg
uneq ol gurve ohggbpxf, naq frag gurz njnl.

19:5 Gura gurer jrag pregnva, naq gbyq Qnivq ubj gur zra jrer freirq.
Naq ur frag gb zrrg gurz: sbe gur zra jrer terngyl nfunzrq. Naq gur
xvat fnvq, Gneel ng Wrevpub hagvy lbhe orneqf or tebja, naq gura
erghea.

19:6 Naq jura gur puvyqera bs Nzzba fnj gung gurl unq znqr gurzfryirf
bqvbhf gb Qnivq, Unaha naq gur puvyqera bs Nzzba frag n gubhfnaq
gnyragf bs fvyire gb uver gurz punevbgf naq ubefrzra bhg bs
Zrfbcbgnzvn, naq bhg bs Flevnznnpunu, naq bhg bs Mbonu.

19:7 Fb gurl uverq guvegl naq gjb gubhfnaq punevbgf, naq gur xvat bs
Znnpunu naq uvf crbcyr; jub pnzr naq cvgpurq orsber Zrqron. Naq gur
puvyqera bs Nzzba tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure sebz gurve pvgvrf, naq
pnzr gb onggyr.

19:8 Naq jura Qnivq urneq bs vg, ur frag Wbno, naq nyy gur ubfg bs gur
zvtugl zra.

19:9 Naq gur puvyqera bs Nzzba pnzr bhg, naq chg gur onggyr va neenl
orsber gur tngr bs gur pvgl: naq gur xvatf gung jrer pbzr jrer ol
gurzfryirf va gur svryq.

19:10 Abj jura Wbno fnj gung gur onggyr jnf frg ntnvafg uvz orsber naq
oruvaq, ur pubfr bhg bs nyy gur pubvpr bs Vfenry, naq chg gurz va
neenl ntnvafg gur Flevnaf.

19:11 Naq gur erfg bs gur crbcyr ur qryvirerq hagb gur unaq bs Novfunv
uvf oebgure, naq gurl frg gurzfryirf va neenl ntnvafg gur puvyqera bs
Nzzba.

19:12 Naq ur fnvq, Vs gur Flevnaf or gbb fgebat sbe zr, gura gubh
funyg uryc zr: ohg vs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba or gbb fgebat sbe gurr,
gura V jvyy uryc gurr.

19:13 Or bs tbbq pbhentr, naq yrg hf orunir bhefryirf inyvnagyl sbe
bhe crbcyr, naq sbe gur pvgvrf bs bhe Tbq: naq yrg gur YBEQ qb gung
juvpu vf tbbq va uvf fvtug.

19:14 Fb Wbno naq gur crbcyr gung jrer jvgu uvz qerj avtu orsber gur
Flevnaf hagb gur onggyr; naq gurl syrq orsber uvz.

19:15 Naq jura gur puvyqera bs Nzzba fnj gung gur Flevnaf jrer syrq,
gurl yvxrjvfr syrq orsber Novfunv uvf oebgure, naq ragrerq vagb gur
pvgl. Gura Wbno pnzr gb Wrehfnyrz.

19:16 Naq jura gur Flevnaf fnj gung gurl jrer chg gb gur jbefr orsber
Vfenry, gurl frag zrffratref, naq qerj sbegu gur Flevnaf gung jrer
orlbaq gur evire: naq Fubcunpu gur pncgnva bs gur ubfg bs Unqnermre
jrag orsber gurz.

19:17 Naq vg jnf gbyq Qnivq; naq ur tngurerq nyy Vfenry, naq cnffrq
bire Wbeqna, naq pnzr hcba gurz, naq frg gur onggyr va neenl ntnvafg
gurz. Fb jura Qnivq unq chg gur onggyr va neenl ntnvafg gur Flevnaf,
gurl sbhtug jvgu uvz.

19:18 Ohg gur Flevnaf syrq orsber Vfenry; naq Qnivq fyrj bs gur
Flevnaf frira gubhfnaq zra juvpu sbhtug va punevbgf, naq sbegl
gubhfnaq sbbgzra, naq xvyyrq Fubcunpu gur pncgnva bs gur ubfg.

19:19 Naq jura gur freinagf bs Unqnermre fnj gung gurl jrer chg gb gur
jbefr orsber Vfenry, gurl znqr crnpr jvgu Qnivq, naq orpnzr uvf
freinagf: arvgure jbhyq gur Flevnaf uryc gur puvyqera bs Nzzba nal
zber.

20:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung nsgre gur lrne jnf rkcverq, ng gur gvzr
gung xvatf tb bhg gb onggyr, Wbno yrq sbegu gur cbjre bs gur nezl, naq
jnfgrq gur pbhagel bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba, naq pnzr naq orfvrtrq
Enoonu. Ohg Qnivq gneevrq ng Wrehfnyrz. Naq Wbno fzbgr Enoonu, naq
qrfgeblrq vg.

20:2 Naq Qnivq gbbx gur pebja bs gurve xvat sebz bss uvf urnq, naq
sbhaq vg gb jrvtu n gnyrag bs tbyq, naq gurer jrer cerpvbhf fgbarf va
vg; naq vg jnf frg hcba Qnivq'f urnq: naq ur oebhtug nyfb rkprrqvat
zhpu fcbvy bhg bs gur pvgl.

20:3 Naq ur oebhtug bhg gur crbcyr gung jrer va vg, naq phg gurz jvgu
fnjf, naq jvgu uneebjf bs veba, naq jvgu nkrf. Rira fb qrnyg Qnivq
jvgu nyy gur pvgvrf bs gur puvyqera bs Nzzba. Naq Qnivq naq nyy gur
crbcyr erghearq gb Wrehfnyrz.

20:4 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre guvf, gung gurer nebfr jne ng Trmre
jvgu gur Cuvyvfgvarf; ng juvpu gvzr Fvoorpunv gur Uhfunguvgr fyrj
Fvccnv, gung jnf bs gur puvyqera bs gur tvnag: naq gurl jrer fhoqhrq.

20:5 Naq gurer jnf jne ntnva jvgu gur Cuvyvfgvarf; naq Ryunana gur fba
bs Wnve fyrj Ynuzv gur oebgure bs Tbyvngu gur Tvggvgr, jubfr fcrne
fgnss jnf yvxr n jrnire'f ornz.

20:6 Naq lrg ntnva gurer jnf jne ng Tngu, jurer jnf n zna bs terng
fgngher, jubfr svatref naq gbrf jrer sbhe naq gjragl, fvk ba rnpu
unaq, naq fvk ba rnpu sbbg naq ur nyfb jnf gur fba bs gur tvnag.

20:7 Ohg jura ur qrsvrq Vfenry, Wbanguna gur fba bs Fuvzrn Qnivq'f
oebgure fyrj uvz.

20:8 Gurfr jrer obea hagb gur tvnag va Tngu; naq gurl sryy ol gur unaq
bs Qnivq, naq ol gur unaq bs uvf freinagf.

21:1 Naq Fngna fgbbq hc ntnvafg Vfenry, naq cebibxrq Qnivq gb ahzore
Vfenry.

21:2 Naq Qnivq fnvq gb Wbno naq gb gur ehyref bs gur crbcyr, Tb,
ahzore Vfenry sebz Orrefuron rira gb Qna; naq oevat gur ahzore bs gurz
gb zr, gung V znl xabj vg.

21:3 Naq Wbno nafjrerq, Gur YBEQ znxr uvf crbcyr na uhaqerq gvzrf fb
znal zber nf gurl or: ohg, zl ybeq gur xvat, ner gurl abg nyy zl
ybeq'f freinagf?  jul gura qbgu zl ybeq erdhver guvf guvat? jul jvyy
ur or n pnhfr bs gerfcnff gb Vfenry?  21:4 Arireguryrff gur xvat'f
jbeq cerinvyrq ntnvafg Wbno. Jurersber Wbno qrcnegrq, naq jrag
guebhtubhg nyy Vfenry, naq pnzr gb Wrehfnyrz.

21:5 Naq Wbno tnir gur fhz bs gur ahzore bs gur crbcyr hagb Qnivq. Naq
nyy gurl bs Vfenry jrer n gubhfnaq gubhfnaq naq na uhaqerq gubhfnaq
zra gung qerj fjbeq: naq Whqnu jnf sbhe uhaqerq guerrfpber naq gra
gubhfnaq zra gung qerj fjbeq.

21:6 Ohg Yriv naq Orawnzva pbhagrq ur abg nzbat gurz: sbe gur xvat'f
jbeq jnf nobzvanoyr gb Wbno.

21:7 Naq Tbq jnf qvfcyrnfrq jvgu guvf guvat; gurersber ur fzbgr
Vfenry.

21:8 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb Tbq, V unir fvaarq terngyl, orpnhfr V unir
qbar guvf guvat: ohg abj, V orfrrpu gurr, qb njnl gur vavdhvgl bs gul
freinag; sbe V unir qbar irel sbbyvfuyl.

21:9 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr hagb Tnq, Qnivq'f frre, fnlvat, 21:10 Tb naq
gryy Qnivq, fnlvat, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, V bssre gurr guerr guvatf:
pubbfr gurr bar bs gurz, gung V znl qb vg hagb gurr.

21:11 Fb Tnq pnzr gb Qnivq, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ,
Pubbfr gurr 21:12 Rvgure guerr lrnef' snzvar; be guerr zbaguf gb or
qrfgeblrq orsber gul sbrf, juvyr gung gur fjbeq bs guvar rarzvrf
biregnxrgu gurr; be ryfr guerr qnlf gur fjbeq bs gur YBEQ, rira gur
crfgvyrapr, va gur ynaq, naq gur natry bs gur YBEQ qrfgeblvat
guebhtubhg nyy gur pbnfgf bs Vfenry. Abj gurersber nqivfr gulfrys jung
jbeq V funyy oevat ntnva gb uvz gung frag zr.

21:13 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb Tnq, V nz va n terng fgenvg: yrg zr snyy abj
vagb gur unaq bs gur YBEQ; sbe irel terng ner uvf zrepvrf: ohg yrg zr
abg snyy vagb gur unaq bs zna.

21:14 Fb gur YBEQ frag crfgvyrapr hcba Vfenry: naq gurer sryy bs
Vfenry friragl gubhfnaq zra.

21:15 Naq Tbq frag na natry hagb Wrehfnyrz gb qrfgebl vg: naq nf ur
jnf qrfgeblvat, gur YBEQ oruryq, naq ur ercragrq uvz bs gur rivy, naq
fnvq gb gur natry gung qrfgeblrq, Vg vf rabhtu, fgnl abj guvar unaq.
Naq gur natry bs gur YBEQ fgbbq ol gur guerfuvatsybbe bs Beana gur
Wrohfvgr.

21:16 Naq Qnivq yvsgrq hc uvf rlrf, naq fnj gur natry bs gur YBEQ
fgnaq orgjrra gur rnegu naq gur urnira, univat n qenja fjbeq va uvf
unaq fgergpurq bhg bire Wrehfnyrz. Gura Qnivq naq gur ryqref bs
Vfenry, jub jrer pybgurq va fnpxpybgu, sryy hcba gurve snprf.

21:17 Naq Qnivq fnvq hagb Tbq, Vf vg abg V gung pbzznaqrq gur crbcyr
gb or ahzorerq? rira V vg vf gung unir fvaarq naq qbar rivy vaqrrq;
ohg nf sbe gurfr furrc, jung unir gurl qbar? yrg guvar unaq, V cenl
gurr, B YBEQ zl Tbq, or ba zr, naq ba zl sngure'f ubhfr; ohg abg ba
gul crbcyr, gung gurl fubhyq or cynthrq.

21:18 Gura gur natry bs gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq Tnq gb fnl gb Qnivq, gung
Qnivq fubhyq tb hc, naq frg hc na nygne hagb gur YBEQ va gur
guerfuvatsybbe bs Beana gur Wrohfvgr.

21:19 Naq Qnivq jrag hc ng gur fnlvat bs Tnq, juvpu ur fcnxr va gur
anzr bs gur YBEQ.

21:20 Naq Beana ghearq onpx, naq fnj gur natry; naq uvf sbhe fbaf jvgu
uvz uvq gurzfryirf. Abj Beana jnf guerfuvat jurng.

21:21 Naq nf Qnivq pnzr gb Beana, Beana ybbxrq naq fnj Qnivq, naq jrag
bhg bs gur guerfuvatsybbe, naq objrq uvzfrys gb Qnivq jvgu uvf snpr gb
gur tebhaq.

21:22 Gura Qnivq fnvq gb Beana, Tenag zr gur cynpr bs guvf
guerfuvatsybbe, gung V znl ohvyq na nygne gurerva hagb gur YBEQ: gubh
funyg tenag vg zr sbe gur shyy cevpr: gung gur cynthr znl or fgnlrq
sebz gur crbcyr.

21:23 Naq Beana fnvq hagb Qnivq, Gnxr vg gb gurr, naq yrg zl ybeq gur
xvat qb gung juvpu vf tbbq va uvf rlrf: yb, V tvir gurr gur bkra nyfb
sbe oheag bssrevatf, naq gur guerfuvat vafgehzragf sbe jbbq, naq gur
jurng sbe gur zrng bssrevat; V tvir vg nyy.

21:24 Naq xvat Qnivq fnvq gb Beana, Anl; ohg V jvyy irevyl ohl vg sbe
gur shyy cevpr: sbe V jvyy abg gnxr gung juvpu vf guvar sbe gur YBEQ,
abe bssre oheag bssrevatf jvgubhg pbfg.

21:25 Fb Qnivq tnir gb Beana sbe gur cynpr fvk uhaqerq furxryf bs tbyq
ol jrvtug.

21:26 Naq Qnivq ohvyg gurer na nygne hagb gur YBEQ, naq bssrerq oheag
bssrevatf naq crnpr bssrevatf, naq pnyyrq hcba gur YBEQ; naq ur
nafjrerq uvz sebz urnira ol sver hcba gur nygne bs oheag bssrevat.

21:27 Naq gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq gur natry; naq ur chg hc uvf fjbeq ntnva
vagb gur furngu gurerbs.

21:28 Ng gung gvzr jura Qnivq fnj gung gur YBEQ unq nafjrerq uvz va
gur guerfuvatsybbe bs Beana gur Wrohfvgr, gura ur fnpevsvprq gurer.

21:29 Sbe gur gnoreanpyr bs gur YBEQ, juvpu Zbfrf znqr va gur
jvyqrearff, naq gur nygne bs gur oheag bssrevat, jrer ng gung frnfba
va gur uvtu cynpr ng Tvorba.

21:30 Ohg Qnivq pbhyq abg tb orsber vg gb radhver bs Tbq: sbe ur jnf
nsenvq orpnhfr bs gur fjbeq bs gur natry bs gur YBEQ.

22:1 Gura Qnivq fnvq, Guvf vf gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ Tbq, naq guvf vf
gur nygne bs gur oheag bssrevat sbe Vfenry.

22:2 Naq Qnivq pbzznaqrq gb tngure gbtrgure gur fgenatref gung jrer va
gur ynaq bs Vfenry; naq ur frg znfbaf gb urj jebhtug fgbarf gb ohvyq
gur ubhfr bs Tbq.

22:3 Naq Qnivq cercnerq veba va nohaqnapr sbe gur anvyf sbe gur qbbef
bs gur tngrf, naq sbe gur wbvavatf; naq oenff va nohaqnapr jvgubhg
jrvtug; 22:4 Nyfb prqne gerrf va nohaqnapr: sbe gur Mvqbavnaf naq gurl
bs Gler oebhtug zhpu prqne jbbq gb Qnivq.

22:5 Naq Qnivq fnvq, Fbybzba zl fba vf lbhat naq graqre, naq gur ubhfr
gung vf gb or ohvyqrq sbe gur YBEQ zhfg or rkprrqvat zntavsvpny, bs
snzr naq bs tybel guebhtubhg nyy pbhagevrf: V jvyy gurersber abj znxr
cercnengvba sbe vg. Fb Qnivq cercnerq nohaqnagyl orsber uvf qrngu.

22:6 Gura ur pnyyrq sbe Fbybzba uvf fba, naq punetrq uvz gb ohvyq na
ubhfr sbe gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry.

22:7 Naq Qnivq fnvq gb Fbybzba, Zl fba, nf sbe zr, vg jnf va zl zvaq
gb ohvyq na ubhfr hagb gur anzr bs gur YBEQ zl Tbq: 22:8 Ohg gur jbeq
bs gur YBEQ pnzr gb zr, fnlvat, Gubh unfg furq oybbq nohaqnagyl, naq
unfg znqr terng jnef: gubh funyg abg ohvyq na ubhfr hagb zl anzr,
orpnhfr gubh unfg furq zhpu oybbq hcba gur rnegu va zl fvtug.

22:9 Orubyq, n fba funyy or obea gb gurr, jub funyy or n zna bs erfg;
naq V jvyy tvir uvz erfg sebz nyy uvf rarzvrf ebhaq nobhg: sbe uvf
anzr funyy or Fbybzba, naq V jvyy tvir crnpr naq dhvrgarff hagb Vfenry
va uvf qnlf.

22:10 Ur funyy ohvyq na ubhfr sbe zl anzr; naq ur funyy or zl fba, naq
V jvyy or uvf sngure; naq V jvyy rfgnoyvfu gur guebar bs uvf xvatqbz
bire Vfenry sbe rire.

22:11 Abj, zl fba, gur YBEQ or jvgu gurr; naq cebfcre gubh, naq ohvyq
gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ gul Tbq, nf ur ungu fnvq bs gurr.

22:12 Bayl gur YBEQ tvir gurr jvfqbz naq haqrefgnaqvat, naq tvir gurr
punetr pbapreavat Vfenry, gung gubh znlrfg xrrc gur ynj bs gur YBEQ
gul Tbq.

22:13 Gura funyg gubh cebfcre, vs gubh gnxrfg urrq gb shysvy gur
fgnghgrf naq whqtzragf juvpu gur YBEQ punetrq Zbfrf jvgu pbapreavat
Vfenry: or fgebat, naq bs tbbq pbhentr; qernq abg, abe or qvfznlrq.

22:14 Abj, orubyq, va zl gebhoyr V unir cercnerq sbe gur ubhfr bs gur
YBEQ na uhaqerq gubhfnaq gnyragf bs tbyq, naq n gubhfnaq gubhfnaq
gnyragf bs fvyire; naq bs oenff naq veba jvgubhg jrvtug; sbe vg vf va
nohaqnapr: gvzore nyfb naq fgbar unir V cercnerq; naq gubh znlrfg nqq
gurergb.

22:15 Zberbire gurer ner jbexzra jvgu gurr va nohaqnapr, urjref naq
jbexref bs fgbar naq gvzore, naq nyy znaare bs phaavat zra sbe rirel
znaare bs jbex.

22:16 Bs gur tbyq, gur fvyire, naq gur oenff, naq gur veba, gurer vf
ab ahzore. Nevfr gurersber, naq or qbvat, naq gur YBEQ or jvgu gurr.

22:17 Qnivq nyfb pbzznaqrq nyy gur cevaprf bs Vfenry gb uryc Fbybzba
uvf fba, fnlvat, 22:18 Vf abg gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq jvgu lbh? naq ungu ur
abg tvira lbh erfg ba rirel fvqr? sbe ur ungu tvira gur vaunovgnagf bs
gur ynaq vagb zvar unaq; naq gur ynaq vf fhoqhrq orsber gur YBEQ, naq
orsber uvf crbcyr.

22:19 Abj frg lbhe urneg naq lbhe fbhy gb frrx gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq;
nevfr gurersber, naq ohvyq lr gur fnapghnel bs gur YBEQ Tbq, gb oevat
gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ, naq gur ubyl irffryf bs Tbq, vagb
gur ubhfr gung vf gb or ohvyg gb gur anzr bs gur YBEQ.

23:1 Fb jura Qnivq jnf byq naq shyy bs qnlf, ur znqr Fbybzba uvf fba
xvat bire Vfenry.

23:2 Naq ur tngurerq gbtrgure nyy gur cevaprf bs Vfenry, jvgu gur
cevrfgf naq gur Yrivgrf.

23:3 Abj gur Yrivgrf jrer ahzorerq sebz gur ntr bs guvegl lrnef naq
hcjneq: naq gurve ahzore ol gurve cbyyf, zna ol zna, jnf guvegl naq
rvtug gubhfnaq.

23:4 Bs juvpu, gjragl naq sbhe gubhfnaq jrer gb frg sbejneq gur jbex
bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ; naq fvk gubhfnaq jrer bssvpref naq whqtrf:
23:5 Zberbire sbhe gubhfnaq jrer cbegref; naq sbhe gubhfnaq cenvfrq
gur YBEQ jvgu gur vafgehzragf juvpu V znqr, fnvq Qnivq, gb cenvfr
gurerjvgu.

23:6 Naq Qnivq qvivqrq gurz vagb pbhefrf nzbat gur fbaf bs Yriv,
anzryl, Trefuba, Xbungu, naq Zrenev.

23:7 Bs gur Trefubavgrf jrer, Ynnqna, naq Fuvzrv.

23:8 Gur fbaf bs Ynnqna; gur puvrs jnf Wruvry, naq Mrgunz, naq Wbry,
guerr.

23:9 Gur fbaf bs Fuvzrv; Furybzvgu, naq Unmvry, naq Unena, guerr.
Gurfr jrer gur puvrs bs gur snguref bs Ynnqna.

23:10 Naq gur fbaf bs Fuvzrv jrer, Wnungu, Mvan, naq Wrhfu, naq
Orevnu.

Gurfr sbhe jrer gur fbaf bs Fuvzrv.

23:11 Naq Wnungu jnf gur puvrs, naq Mvmnu gur frpbaq: ohg Wrhfu naq
Orevnu unq abg znal fbaf; gurersber gurl jrer va bar erpxbavat,
nppbeqvat gb gurve sngure'f ubhfr.

23:12 Gur fbaf bs Xbungu; Nzenz, Vmune, Uroeba, naq Hmmvry, sbhe.

23:13 Gur fbaf bs Nzenz; Nneba naq Zbfrf: naq Nneba jnf frcnengrq,
gung ur fubhyq fnapgvsl gur zbfg ubyl guvatf, ur naq uvf fbaf sbe
rire, gb ohea vaprafr orsber gur YBEQ, gb zvavfgre hagb uvz, naq gb
oyrff va uvf anzr sbe rire.

23:14 Abj pbapreavat Zbfrf gur zna bs Tbq, uvf fbaf jrer anzrq bs gur
gevor bs Yriv.

23:15 Gur fbaf bs Zbfrf jrer, Trefubz, naq Ryvrmre.

23:16 Bs gur fbaf bs Trefubz, Furohry jnf gur puvrs.

23:17 Naq gur fbaf bs Ryvrmre jrer, Erunovnu gur puvrs. Naq Ryvrmre
unq abar bgure fbaf; ohg gur fbaf bs Erunovnu jrer irel znal.

23:18 Bs gur fbaf bs Vmune; Furybzvgu gur puvrs.

23:19 Bs gur fbaf bs Uroeba; Wrevnu gur svefg, Nznevnu gur frpbaq,
Wnunmvry gur guveq, naq Wrxnzrnz gur sbhegu.

23:20 Bs gur fbaf bs Hmmvry; Zvpnu gur svefg naq Wrfvnu gur frpbaq.

23:21 Gur fbaf bs Zrenev; Znuyv, naq Zhfuv. Gur fbaf bs Znuyv;
Ryrnmne, naq Xvfu.

23:22 Naq Ryrnmne qvrq, naq unq ab fbaf, ohg qnhtugref: naq gurve
oerguera gur fbaf bs Xvfu gbbx gurz.

23:23 Gur fbaf bs Zhfuv; Znuyv, naq Rqre, naq Wrerzbgu, guerr.

23:24 Gurfr jrer gur fbaf bs Yriv nsgre gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref;
rira gur puvrs bs gur snguref, nf gurl jrer pbhagrq ol ahzore bs anzrf
ol gurve cbyyf, gung qvq gur jbex sbe gur freivpr bs gur ubhfr bs gur
YBEQ, sebz gur ntr bs gjragl lrnef naq hcjneq.

23:25 Sbe Qnivq fnvq, Gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry ungu tvira erfg hagb uvf
crbcyr, gung gurl znl qjryy va Wrehfnyrz sbe rire: 23:26 Naq nyfb hagb
gur Yrivgrf; gurl funyy ab zber pneel gur gnoreanpyr, abe nal irffryf
bs vg sbe gur freivpr gurerbs.

23:27 Sbe ol gur ynfg jbeqf bs Qnivq gur Yrivgrf jrer ahzorerq sebz
gjragl lrnef byq naq nobir: 23:28 Orpnhfr gurve bssvpr jnf gb jnvg ba
gur fbaf bs Nneba sbe gur freivpr bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, va gur
pbhegf, naq va gur punzoref, naq va gur chevslvat bs nyy ubyl guvatf,
naq gur jbex bs gur freivpr bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq; 23:29 Obgu sbe gur
furjoernq, naq sbe gur svar sybhe sbe zrng bssrevat, naq sbe gur
hayrnirarq pnxrf, naq sbe gung juvpu vf onxrq va gur cna, naq sbe gung
juvpu vf sevrq, naq sbe nyy znaare bs zrnfher naq fvmr; 23:30 Naq gb
fgnaq rirel zbeavat gb gunax naq cenvfr gur YBEQ, naq yvxrjvfr ng
rira: 23:31 Naq gb bssre nyy oheag fnpevsvprf hagb gur YBEQ va gur
fnoonguf, va gur arj zbbaf, naq ba gur frg srnfgf, ol ahzore,
nppbeqvat gb gur beqre pbzznaqrq hagb gurz, pbagvahnyyl orsber gur
YBEQ: 23:32 Naq gung gurl fubhyq xrrc gur punetr bs gur gnoreanpyr bs
gur pbatertngvba, naq gur punetr bs gur ubyl cynpr, naq gur punetr bs
gur fbaf bs Nneba gurve oerguera, va gur freivpr bs gur ubhfr bs gur
YBEQ.

24:1 Abj gurfr ner gur qvivfvbaf bs gur fbaf bs Nneba. Gur fbaf bs
Nneba; Anqno, naq Novuh, Ryrnmne, naq Vgunzne.

24:2 Ohg Anqno naq Novuh qvrq orsber gurve sngure, naq unq ab
puvyqera: gurersber Ryrnmne naq Vgunzne rkrphgrq gur cevrfg'f bssvpr.

24:3 Naq Qnivq qvfgevohgrq gurz, obgu Mnqbx bs gur fbaf bs Ryrnmne,
naq Nuvzryrpu bs gur fbaf bs Vgunzne, nppbeqvat gb gurve bssvprf va
gurve freivpr.

24:4 Naq gurer jrer zber puvrs zra sbhaq bs gur fbaf bs Ryrnmne guna
bs gur fbaf bs Vgunzne, naq guhf jrer gurl qvivqrq. Nzbat gur fbaf bs
Ryrnmne gurer jrer fvkgrra puvrs zra bs gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref,
naq rvtug nzbat gur fbaf bs Vgunzne nppbeqvat gb gur ubhfr bs gurve
snguref.

24:5 Guhf jrer gurl qvivqrq ol ybg, bar fbeg jvgu nabgure; sbe gur
tbireabef bs gur fnapghnel, naq tbireabef bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq, jrer bs
gur fbaf bs Ryrnmne, naq bs gur fbaf bs Vgunzne.

24:6 Naq Furznvnu gur fba bs Argunarry gur fpevor, bar bs gur Yrivgrf,
jebgr gurz orsber gur xvat, naq gur cevaprf, naq Mnqbx gur cevrfg, naq
Nuvzryrpu gur fba bs Novngune, naq orsber gur puvrs bs gur snguref bs
gur cevrfgf naq Yrivgrf: bar cevapvcny ubhfrubyq orvat gnxra sbe
Ryrnmne, naq bar gnxra sbe Vgunzne.

24:7 Abj gur svefg ybg pnzr sbegu gb Wrubvnevo, gur frpbaq gb Wrqnvnu,
24:8 Gur guveq gb Unevz, gur sbhegu gb Frbevz, 24:9 Gur svsgu gb
Znypuvwnu, gur fvkgu gb Zvwnzva, 24:10 Gur friragu gb Unxxbm, gur
rvtugu gb Novwnu, 24:11 Gur avagu gb Wrfuhnu, gur gragu gb Furpnavnu,
24:12 Gur ryriragu gb Ryvnfuvo, gur gjrysgu gb Wnxvz, 24:13 Gur
guvegrragu gb Uhccnu, gur sbhegrragu gb Wrfurorno, 24:14 Gur svsgrragu
gb Ovytnu, gur fvkgrragu gb Vzzre, 24:15 Gur friragrragu gb Urmve, gur
rvtugrragu gb Ncufrf, 24:16 Gur avargrragu gb Crgunuvnu, gur gjragvrgu
gb Wrurmrxry, 24:17 Gur bar naq gjragvrgu gb Wnpuva, gur gjb naq
gjragvrgu gb Tnzhy, 24:18 Gur guerr naq gjragvrgu gb Qrynvnu, gur sbhe
naq gjragvrgu gb Znnmvnu.

24:19 Gurfr jrer gur beqrevatf bs gurz va gurve freivpr gb pbzr vagb
gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, nppbeqvat gb gurve znaare, haqre Nneba gurve
sngure, nf gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry unq pbzznaqrq uvz.

24:20 Naq gur erfg bs gur fbaf bs Yriv jrer gurfr: Bs gur fbaf bs
Nzenz; Fuhonry: bs gur fbaf bs Fuhonry; Wruqrvnu.

24:21 Pbapreavat Erunovnu: bs gur fbaf bs Erunovnu, gur svefg jnf
Vffuvnu.

24:22 Bs gur Vmunevgrf; Furybzbgu: bs gur fbaf bs Furybzbgu; Wnungu.

24:23 Naq gur fbaf bs Uroeba; Wrevnu gur svefg, Nznevnu gur frpbaq,
Wnunmvry gur guveq, Wrxnzrnz gur sbhegu.

24:24 Bs gur fbaf bs Hmmvry; Zvpunu: bs gur fbaf bs Zvpunu; Funzve.

24:25 Gur oebgure bs Zvpunu jnf Vffuvnu: bs gur fbaf bs Vffuvnu;
Mrpunevnu.

24:26 Gur fbaf bs Zrenev jrer Znuyv naq Zhfuv: gur fbaf bs Wnnmvnu;
Orab.

24:27 Gur fbaf bs Zrenev ol Wnnmvnu; Orab, naq Fubunz, naq Mnpphe, naq
Voev.

24:28 Bs Znuyv pnzr Ryrnmne, jub unq ab fbaf.

24:29 Pbapreavat Xvfu: gur fba bs Xvfu jnf Wrenuzrry.

24:30 Gur fbaf nyfb bs Zhfuv; Znuyv, naq Rqre, naq Wrevzbgu. Gurfr
jrer gur fbaf bs gur Yrivgrf nsgre gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref.

24:31 Gurfr yvxrjvfr pnfg ybgf bire ntnvafg gurve oerguera gur fbaf bs
Nneba va gur cerfrapr bs Qnivq gur xvat, naq Mnqbx, naq Nuvzryrpu, naq
gur puvrs bs gur snguref bs gur cevrfgf naq Yrivgrf, rira gur
cevapvcny snguref bire ntnvafg gurve lbhatre oerguera.

25:1 Zberbire Qnivq naq gur pncgnvaf bs gur ubfg frcnengrq gb gur
freivpr bs gur fbaf bs Nfncu, naq bs Urzna, naq bs Wrqhguha, jub
fubhyq cebcurfl jvgu unecf, jvgu cfnygrevrf, naq jvgu plzonyf: naq gur
ahzore bs gur jbexzra nppbeqvat gb gurve freivpr jnf: 25:2 Bs gur fbaf
bs Nfncu; Mnpphe, naq Wbfrcu, naq Argunavnu, naq Nfnerynu, gur fbaf bs
Nfncu haqre gur unaqf bs Nfncu, juvpu cebcurfvrq nppbeqvat gb gur
beqre bs gur xvat.

25:3 Bs Wrqhguha: gur fbaf bs Wrqhguha; Trqnyvnu, naq Mrev, naq
Wrfunvnu, Unfunovnu, naq Znggvguvnu, fvk, haqre gur unaqf bs gurve
sngure Wrqhguha, jub cebcurfvrq jvgu n unec, gb tvir gunaxf naq gb
cenvfr gur YBEQ.

25:4 Bs Urzna: gur fbaf bs Urzna: Ohxxvnu, Znggnavnu, Hmmvry, Furohry,
naq Wrevzbgu, Unanavnu, Unanav, Ryvngunu, Tvqqnygv, naq Ebznzgvrmre,
Wbfuorxnfunu, Znyybguv, Ubguve, naq Znunmvbgu: 25:5 Nyy gurfr jrer gur
fbaf bs Urzna gur xvat'f frre va gur jbeqf bs Tbq, gb yvsg hc gur
ubea. Naq Tbq tnir gb Urzna sbhegrra fbaf naq guerr qnhtugref.

25:6 Nyy gurfr jrer haqre gur unaqf bs gurve sngure sbe fbat va gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, jvgu plzonyf, cfnygrevrf, naq unecf, sbe gur
freivpr bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq, nppbeqvat gb gur xvat'f beqre gb Nfncu,
Wrqhguha, naq Urzna.

25:7 Fb gur ahzore bs gurz, jvgu gurve oerguera gung jrer vafgehpgrq
va gur fbatf bs gur YBEQ, rira nyy gung jrer phaavat, jnf gjb uhaqerq
sbhefpber naq rvtug.

25:8 Naq gurl pnfg ybgf, jneq ntnvafg jneq, nf jryy gur fznyy nf gur
terng, gur grnpure nf gur fpubyne.

25:9 Abj gur svefg ybg pnzr sbegu sbe Nfncu gb Wbfrcu: gur frpbaq gb
Trqnyvnu, jub jvgu uvf oerguera naq fbaf jrer gjryir: 25:10 Gur guveq
gb Mnpphe, ur, uvf fbaf, naq uvf oerguera, jrer gjryir: 25:11 Gur
sbhegu gb Vmev, ur, uvf fbaf, naq uvf oerguera, jrer gjryir: 25:12 Gur
svsgu gb Argunavnu, ur, uvf fbaf, naq uvf oerguera, jrer gjryir: 25:13
Gur fvkgu gb Ohxxvnu, ur, uvf fbaf, naq uvf oerguera, jrer gjryir:
25:14 Gur friragu gb Wrfunerynu, ur, uvf fbaf, naq uvf oerguera, jrer
gjryir: 25:15 Gur rvtugu gb Wrfunvnu, ur, uvf fbaf, naq uvf oerguera,
jrer gjryir: 25:16 Gur avagu gb Znggnavnu, ur, uvf fbaf, naq uvf
oerguera, jrer gjryir: 25:17 Gur gragu gb Fuvzrv, ur, uvf fbaf, naq
uvf oerguera, jrer gjryir: 25:18 Gur ryriragu gb Nmnerry, ur, uvf
fbaf, naq uvf oerguera, jrer gjryir: 25:19 Gur gjrysgu gb Unfunovnu,
ur, uvf fbaf, naq uvf oerguera, jrer gjryir: 25:20 Gur guvegrragu gb
Fuhonry, ur, uvf fbaf, naq uvf oerguera, jrer gjryir: 25:21 Gur
sbhegrragu gb Znggvguvnu, ur, uvf fbaf, naq uvf oerguera, jrer gjryir:
25:22 Gur svsgrragu gb Wrerzbgu, ur, uvf fbaf, naq uvf oerguera, jrer
gjryir: 25:23 Gur fvkgrragu gb Unanavnu, ur, uvf fbaf, naq uvf
oerguera, jrer gjryir: 25:24 Gur friragrragu gb Wbfuorxnfunu, ur, uvf
fbaf, naq uvf oerguera, jrer gjryir: 25:25 Gur rvtugrragu gb Unanav,
ur, uvf fbaf, naq uvf oerguera, jrer gjryir: 25:26 Gur avargrragu gb
Znyybguv, ur, uvf fbaf, naq uvf oerguera, jrer gjryir: 25:27 Gur
gjragvrgu gb Ryvngunu, ur, uvf fbaf, naq uvf oerguera, jrer gjryir:
25:28 Gur bar naq gjragvrgu gb Ubguve, ur, uvf fbaf, naq uvf oerguera,
jrer gjryir: 25:29 Gur gjb naq gjragvrgu gb Tvqqnygv, ur, uvf fbaf,
naq uvf oerguera, jrer gjryir: 25:30 Gur guerr naq gjragvrgu gb
Znunmvbgu, ur, uvf fbaf, naq uvf oerguera, jrer gjryir: 25:31 Gur sbhe
naq gjragvrgu gb Ebznzgvrmre, ur, uvf fbaf, naq uvf oerguera, jrer
gjryir.

26:1 Pbapreavat gur qvivfvbaf bs gur cbegref: Bs gur Xbeuvgrf jnf
Zrfuryrzvnu gur fba bs Xber, bs gur fbaf bs Nfncu.

26:2 Naq gur fbaf bs Zrfuryrzvnu jrer, Mrpunevnu gur svefgobea,
Wrqvnry gur frpbaq, Mronqvnu gur guveq, Wnguavry gur sbhegu, 26:3 Rynz
gur svsgu, Wrubunana gur fvkgu, Ryvbranv gur friragu.

26:4 Zberbire gur fbaf bs Borqrqbz jrer, Furznvnu gur svefgobea,
Wrubmnonq gur frpbaq, Wbnu gur guveq, naq Fnpne gur sbhegu, naq
Argunarry gur svsgu.

26:5 Nzzvry gur fvkgu, Vffnpune gur friragu, Crhygunv gur rvtugu: sbe
Tbq oyrffrq uvz.

26:6 Nyfb hagb Furznvnu uvf fba jrer fbaf obea, gung ehyrq guebhtubhg
gur ubhfr bs gurve sngure: sbe gurl jrer zvtugl zra bs inybhe.

26:7 Gur fbaf bs Furznvnu; Bguav, naq Ercunry, naq Borq, Rymnonq,
jubfr oerguera jrer fgebat zra, Ryvuh, naq Frznpuvnu.

26:8 Nyy gurfr bs gur fbaf bs Borqrqbz: gurl naq gurve fbaf naq gurve
oerguera, noyr zra sbe fgeratgu sbe gur freivpr, jrer guerrfpber naq
gjb bs Borqrqbz.

26:9 Naq Zrfuryrzvnu unq fbaf naq oerguera, fgebat zra, rvtugrra.

26:10 Nyfb Ubfnu, bs gur puvyqera bs Zrenev, unq fbaf; Fvzev gur
puvrs, (sbe gubhtu ur jnf abg gur svefgobea, lrg uvf sngure znqr uvz
gur puvrs;) 26:11 Uvyxvnu gur frpbaq, Gronyvnu gur guveq, Mrpunevnu
gur sbhegu: nyy gur fbaf naq oerguera bs Ubfnu jrer guvegrra.

26:12 Nzbat gurfr jrer gur qvivfvbaf bs gur cbegref, rira nzbat gur
puvrs zra, univat jneqf bar ntnvafg nabgure, gb zvavfgre va gur ubhfr
bs gur YBEQ.

26:13 Naq gurl pnfg ybgf, nf jryy gur fznyy nf gur terng, nppbeqvat gb
gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, sbe rirel tngr.

26:14 Naq gur ybg rnfgjneq sryy gb Furyrzvnu. Gura sbe Mrpunevnu uvf
fba, n jvfr pbhafryybe, gurl pnfg ybgf; naq uvf ybg pnzr bhg
abegujneq.

26:15 Gb Borqrqbz fbhgujneq; naq gb uvf fbaf gur ubhfr bs Nfhccvz.

26:16 Gb Fuhccvz naq Ubfnu gur ybg pnzr sbegu jrfgjneq, jvgu gur tngr
Funyyrpurgu, ol gur pnhfrjnl bs gur tbvat hc, jneq ntnvafg jneq.

26:17 Rnfgjneq jrer fvk Yrivgrf, abegujneq sbhe n qnl, fbhgujneq sbhe
n qnl, naq gbjneq Nfhccvz gjb naq gjb.

26:18 Ng Cneone jrfgjneq, sbhe ng gur pnhfrjnl, naq gjb ng Cneone.

26:19 Gurfr ner gur qvivfvbaf bs gur cbegref nzbat gur fbaf bs Xber,
naq nzbat gur fbaf bs Zrenev.

26:20 Naq bs gur Yrivgrf, Nuvwnu jnf bire gur gernfherf bs gur ubhfr
bs Tbq, naq bire gur gernfherf bs gur qrqvpngrq guvatf.

26:21 Nf pbapreavat gur fbaf bs Ynnqna; gur fbaf bs gur Trefubavgr
Ynnqna, puvrs snguref, rira bs Ynnqna gur Trefubavgr, jrer Wruvryv.

26:22 Gur fbaf bs Wruvryv; Mrgunz, naq Wbry uvf oebgure, juvpu jrer
bire gur gernfherf bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

26:23 Bs gur Nzenzvgrf, naq gur Vmunevgrf, gur Uroebavgrf, naq gur
Hmmvryvgrf: 26:24 Naq Furohry gur fba bs Trefubz, gur fba bs Zbfrf,
jnf ehyre bs gur gernfherf.

26:25 Naq uvf oerguera ol Ryvrmre; Erunovnu uvf fba, naq Wrfunvnu uvf
fba, naq Wbenz uvf fba, naq Mvpuev uvf fba, naq Furybzvgu uvf fba.

26:26 Juvpu Furybzvgu naq uvf oerguera jrer bire nyy gur gernfherf bs
gur qrqvpngrq guvatf, juvpu Qnivq gur xvat, naq gur puvrs snguref, gur
pncgnvaf bire gubhfnaqf naq uhaqerqf, naq gur pncgnvaf bs gur ubfg,
unq qrqvpngrq.

26:27 Bhg bs gur fcbvyf jba va onggyrf qvq gurl qrqvpngr gb znvagnva
gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

26:28 Naq nyy gung Fnzhry gur frre, naq Fnhy gur fba bs Xvfu, naq
Noare gur fba bs Are, naq Wbno gur fba bs Mrehvnu, unq qrqvpngrq; naq
jubfbrire unq qrqvpngrq nal guvat, vg jnf haqre gur unaq bs Furybzvgu,
naq bs uvf oerguera.

26:29 Bs gur Vmunevgrf, Puranavnu naq uvf fbaf jrer sbe gur bhgjneq
ohfvarff bire Vfenry, sbe bssvpref naq whqtrf.

26:30 Naq bs gur Uroebavgrf, Unfunovnu naq uvf oerguera, zra bs
inybhe, n gubhfnaq naq frira uhaqerq, jrer bssvpref nzbat gurz bs
Vfenry ba guvf fvqr Wbeqna jrfgjneq va nyy gur ohfvarff bs gur YBEQ,
naq va gur freivpr bs gur xvat.

26:31 Nzbat gur Uroebavgrf jnf Wrevwnu gur puvrs, rira nzbat gur
Uroebavgrf, nppbeqvat gb gur trarengvbaf bs uvf snguref. Va gur
sbegvrgu lrne bs gur ervta bs Qnivq gurl jrer fbhtug sbe, naq gurer
jrer sbhaq nzbat gurz zvtugl zra bs inybhe ng Wnmre bs Tvyrnq.

26:32 Naq uvf oerguera, zra bs inybhe, jrer gjb gubhfnaq naq frira
uhaqerq puvrs snguref, jubz xvat Qnivq znqr ehyref bire gur
Erhoravgrf, gur Tnqvgrf, naq gur unys gevor bs Znanffru, sbe rirel
znggre cregnvavat gb Tbq, naq nssnvef bs gur xvat.

27:1 Abj gur puvyqera bs Vfenry nsgre gurve ahzore, gb jvg, gur puvrs
snguref naq pncgnvaf bs gubhfnaqf naq uhaqerqf, naq gurve bssvpref
gung freirq gur xvat va nal znggre bs gur pbhefrf, juvpu pnzr va naq
jrag bhg zbagu ol zbagu guebhtubhg nyy gur zbaguf bs gur lrne, bs
rirel pbhefr jrer gjragl naq sbhe gubhfnaq.

27:2 Bire gur svefg pbhefr sbe gur svefg zbagu jnf Wnfubornz gur fba
bs Mnoqvry: naq va uvf pbhefr jrer gjragl naq sbhe gubhfnaq.

27:3 Bs gur puvyqera bs Crerm jnf gur puvrs bs nyy gur pncgnvaf bs gur
ubfg sbe gur svefg zbagu.

27:4 Naq bire gur pbhefr bs gur frpbaq zbagu jnf Qbqnv na Nubuvgr, naq
bs uvf pbhefr jnf Zvxybgu nyfb gur ehyre: va uvf pbhefr yvxrjvfr jrer
gjragl naq sbhe gubhfnaq.

27:5 Gur guveq pncgnva bs gur ubfg sbe gur guveq zbagu jnf Oranvnu gur
fba bs Wrubvnqn, n puvrs cevrfg: naq va uvf pbhefr jrer gjragl naq
sbhe gubhfnaq.

27:6 Guvf vf gung Oranvnu, jub jnf zvtugl nzbat gur guvegl, naq nobir
gur guvegl: naq va uvf pbhefr jnf Nzzvmnonq uvf fba.

27:7 Gur sbhegu pncgnva sbe gur sbhegu zbagu jnf Nfnury gur oebgure bs
Wbno, naq Mronqvnu uvf fba nsgre uvz: naq va uvf pbhefr jrer gjragl
naq sbhe gubhfnaq.

27:8 Gur svsgu pncgnva sbe gur svsgu zbagu jnf Funzuhgu gur Vmenuvgr:
naq va uvf pbhefr jrer gjragl naq sbhe gubhfnaq.

27:9 Gur fvkgu pncgnva sbe gur fvkgu zbagu jnf Ven gur fba bs Vxxrfu
gur Grxbvgr: naq va uvf pbhefr jrer gjragl naq sbhe gubhfnaq.

27:10 Gur friragu pncgnva sbe gur friragu zbagu jnf Uryrm gur
Crybavgr, bs gur puvyqera bs Rcuenvz: naq va uvf pbhefr jrer gjragl
naq sbhe gubhfnaq.

27:11 Gur rvtugu pncgnva sbe gur rvtugu zbagu jnf Fvoorpnv gur
Uhfunguvgr, bs gur Mneuvgrf: naq va uvf pbhefr jrer gjragl naq sbhe
gubhfnaq.

27:12 Gur avagu pncgnva sbe gur avagu zbagu jnf Novrmre gur
Nargbguvgr, bs gur Orawnzvgrf: naq va uvf pbhefr jrer gjragl naq sbhe
gubhfnaq.

27:13 Gur gragu pncgnva sbe gur gragu zbagu jnf Znunenv gur
Argbcunguvgr, bs gur Mneuvgrf: naq va uvf pbhefr jrer gjragl naq sbhe
gubhfnaq.

27:14 Gur ryriragu pncgnva sbe gur ryriragu zbagu jnf Oranvnu gur
Cvengubavgr, bs gur puvyqera bs Rcuenvz: naq va uvf pbhefr jrer gjragl
naq sbhe gubhfnaq.

27:15 Gur gjrysgu pncgnva sbe gur gjrysgu zbagu jnf Uryqnv gur
Argbcunguvgr, bs Bguavry: naq va uvf pbhefr jrer gjragl naq sbhe
gubhfnaq.

27:16 Shegurezber bire gur gevorf bs Vfenry: gur ehyre bs gur
Erhoravgrf jnf Ryvrmre gur fba bs Mvpuev: bs gur Fvzrbavgrf,
Furcungvnu gur fba bs Znnpunu: 27:17 Bs gur Yrivgrf, Unfunovnu gur fba
bs Xrzhry: bs gur Nnebavgrf, Mnqbx: 27:18 Bs Whqnu, Ryvuh, bar bs gur
oerguera bs Qnivq: bs Vffnpune, Bzev gur fba bs Zvpunry: 27:19 Bs
Mrohyha, Vfuznvnu gur fba bs Bonqvnu: bs Ancugnyv, Wrevzbgu gur fba bs
Nmevry: 27:20 Bs gur puvyqera bs Rcuenvz, Ubfurn gur fba bs Nmnmvnu:
bs gur unys gevor bs Znanffru, Wbry gur fba bs Crqnvnu: 27:21 Bs gur
unys gevor bs Znanffru va Tvyrnq, Vqqb gur fba bs Mrpunevnu: bs
Orawnzva, Wnnfvry gur fba bs Noare: 27:22 Bs Qna, Nmnerry gur fba bs
Wrebunz. Gurfr jrer gur cevaprf bs gur gevorf bs Vfenry.

27:23 Ohg Qnivq gbbx abg gur ahzore bs gurz sebz gjragl lrnef byq naq
haqre: orpnhfr gur YBEQ unq fnvq ur jbhyq vapernfr Vfenry yvxr gb gur
fgnef bs gur urniraf.

27:24 Wbno gur fba bs Mrehvnu ortna gb ahzore, ohg ur svavfurq abg,
orpnhfr gurer sryy jengu sbe vg ntnvafg Vfenry; arvgure jnf gur ahzore
chg va gur nppbhag bs gur puebavpyrf bs xvat Qnivq.

27:25 Naq bire gur xvat'f gernfherf jnf Nmznirgu gur fba bs Nqvry: naq
bire gur fgberubhfrf va gur svryqf, va gur pvgvrf, naq va gur
ivyyntrf, naq va gur pnfgyrf, jnf Wrubanguna gur fba bs Hmmvnu: 27:26
Naq bire gurz gung qvq gur jbex bs gur svryq sbe gvyyntr bs gur tebhaq
jnf Rmev gur fba bs Puryho: 27:27 Naq bire gur ivarlneqf jnf Fuvzrv
gur Enznguvgr: bire gur vapernfr bs gur ivarlneqf sbe gur jvar pryynef
jnf Mnoqv gur Fuvcuzvgr: 27:28 Naq bire gur byvir gerrf naq gur
flpbzber gerrf gung jrer va gur ybj cynvaf jnf Onnyunana gur Trqrevgr:
naq bire gur pryynef bs bvy jnf Wbnfu: 27:29 Naq bire gur ureqf gung
srq va Funeba jnf Fuvgenv gur Funebavgr: naq bire gur ureqf gung jrer
va gur inyyrlf jnf Funcung gur fba bs Nqynv: 27:30 Bire gur pnzryf
nyfb jnf Bovy gur Vfuznryvgr: naq bire gur nffrf jnf Wruqrvnu gur
Zrebabguvgr: 27:31 Naq bire gur sybpxf jnf Wnmvm gur Untrevgr. Nyy
gurfr jrer gur ehyref bs gur fhofgnapr juvpu jnf xvat Qnivq'f.

27:32 Nyfb Wbanguna Qnivq'f hapyr jnf n pbhafryybe, n jvfr zna, naq n
fpevor: naq Wruvry gur fba bs Unpuzbav jnf jvgu gur xvat'f fbaf: 27:33
Naq Nuvgubcury jnf gur xvat'f pbhafryybe: naq Uhfunv gur Nepuvgr jnf
gur xvat'f pbzcnavba: 27:34 Naq nsgre Nuvgubcury jnf Wrubvnqn gur fba
bs Oranvnu, naq Novngune: naq gur trareny bs gur xvat'f nezl jnf Wbno.

28:1 Naq Qnivq nffrzoyrq nyy gur cevaprf bs Vfenry, gur cevaprf bs gur
gevorf, naq gur pncgnvaf bs gur pbzcnavrf gung zvavfgrerq gb gur xvat
ol pbhefr, naq gur pncgnvaf bire gur gubhfnaqf, naq pncgnvaf bire gur
uhaqerqf, naq gur fgrjneqf bire nyy gur fhofgnapr naq cbffrffvba bs
gur xvat, naq bs uvf fbaf, jvgu gur bssvpref, naq jvgu gur zvtugl zra,
naq jvgu nyy gur inyvnag zra, hagb Wrehfnyrz.

28:2 Gura Qnivq gur xvat fgbbq hc hcba uvf srrg, naq fnvq, Urne zr, zl
oerguera, naq zl crbcyr: Nf sbe zr, V unq va zvar urneg gb ohvyq na
ubhfr bs erfg sbe gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ, naq sbe gur
sbbgfgbby bs bhe Tbq, naq unq znqr ernql sbe gur ohvyqvat: 28:3 Ohg
Tbq fnvq hagb zr, Gubh funyg abg ohvyq na ubhfr sbe zl anzr, orpnhfr
gubh unfg orra n zna bs jne, naq unfg furq oybbq.

28:4 Ubjorvg gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry pubfr zr orsber nyy gur ubhfr bs
zl sngure gb or xvat bire Vfenry sbe rire: sbe ur ungu pubfra Whqnu gb
or gur ehyre; naq bs gur ubhfr bs Whqnu, gur ubhfr bs zl sngure; naq
nzbat gur fbaf bs zl sngure ur yvxrq zr gb znxr zr xvat bire nyy
Vfenry: 28:5 Naq bs nyy zl fbaf, (sbe gur YBEQ ungu tvira zr znal
fbaf,) ur ungu pubfra Fbybzba zl fba gb fvg hcba gur guebar bs gur
xvatqbz bs gur YBEQ bire Vfenry.

28:6 Naq ur fnvq hagb zr, Fbybzba gul fba, ur funyy ohvyq zl ubhfr naq
zl pbhegf: sbe V unir pubfra uvz gb or zl fba, naq V jvyy or uvf
sngure.

28:7 Zberbire V jvyy rfgnoyvfu uvf xvatqbz sbe rire, vs ur or pbafgnag
gb qb zl pbzznaqzragf naq zl whqtzragf, nf ng guvf qnl.

28:8 Abj gurersber va gur fvtug bs nyy Vfenry gur pbatertngvba bs gur
YBEQ, naq va gur nhqvrapr bs bhe Tbq, xrrc naq frrx sbe nyy gur
pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq: gung lr znl cbffrff guvf tbbq ynaq,
naq yrnir vg sbe na vaurevgnapr sbe lbhe puvyqera nsgre lbh sbe rire.

28:9 Naq gubh, Fbybzba zl fba, xabj gubh gur Tbq bs gul sngure, naq
freir uvz jvgu n cresrpg urneg naq jvgu n jvyyvat zvaq: sbe gur YBEQ
frnepurgu nyy urnegf, naq haqrefgnaqrgu nyy gur vzntvangvbaf bs gur
gubhtugf: vs gubh frrx uvz, ur jvyy or sbhaq bs gurr; ohg vs gubh
sbefnxr uvz, ur jvyy pnfg gurr bss sbe rire.

28:10 Gnxr urrq abj; sbe gur YBEQ ungu pubfra gurr gb ohvyq na ubhfr
sbe gur fnapghnel: or fgebat, naq qb vg.

28:11 Gura Qnivq tnir gb Fbybzba uvf fba gur cnggrea bs gur cbepu, naq
bs gur ubhfrf gurerbs, naq bs gur gernfhevrf gurerbs, naq bs gur hccre
punzoref gurerbs, naq bs gur vaare cneybhef gurerbs, naq bs gur cynpr
bs gur zrepl frng, 28:12 Naq gur cnggrea bs nyy gung ur unq ol gur
fcvevg, bs gur pbhegf bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq bs nyy gur
punzoref ebhaq nobhg, bs gur gernfhevrf bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq, naq bs
gur gernfhevrf bs gur qrqvpngrq guvatf: 28:13 Nyfb sbe gur pbhefrf bs
gur cevrfgf naq gur Yrivgrf, naq sbe nyy gur jbex bs gur freivpr bs
gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq sbe nyy gur irffryf bs freivpr va gur ubhfr
bs gur YBEQ.

28:14 Ur tnir bs tbyq ol jrvtug sbe guvatf bs tbyq, sbe nyy
vafgehzragf bs nyy znaare bs freivpr; fvyire nyfb sbe nyy vafgehzragf
bs fvyire ol jrvtug, sbe nyy vafgehzragf bs rirel xvaq bs freivpr:
28:15 Rira gur jrvtug sbe gur pnaqyrfgvpxf bs tbyq, naq sbe gurve
ynzcf bs tbyq, ol jrvtug sbe rirel pnaqyrfgvpx, naq sbe gur ynzcf
gurerbs: naq sbe gur pnaqyrfgvpxf bs fvyire ol jrvtug, obgu sbe gur
pnaqyrfgvpx, naq nyfb sbe gur ynzcf gurerbs, nppbeqvat gb gur hfr bs
rirel pnaqyrfgvpx.

28:16 Naq ol jrvtug ur tnir tbyq sbe gur gnoyrf bs furjoernq, sbe
rirel gnoyr; naq yvxrjvfr fvyire sbe gur gnoyrf bs fvyire: 28:17 Nyfb
cher tbyq sbe gur syrfuubbxf, naq gur objyf, naq gur phcf: naq sbe gur
tbyqra onfbaf ur tnir tbyq ol jrvtug sbe rirel onfba; naq yvxrjvfr
fvyire ol jrvtug sbe rirel onfba bs fvyire: 28:18 Naq sbe gur nygne bs
vaprafr ersvarq tbyq ol jrvtug; naq tbyq sbe gur cnggrea bs gur
punevbg bs gur purehovzf, gung fcernq bhg gurve jvatf, naq pbirerq gur
nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ.

28:19 Nyy guvf, fnvq Qnivq, gur YBEQ znqr zr haqrefgnaq va jevgvat ol
uvf unaq hcba zr, rira nyy gur jbexf bs guvf cnggrea.

28:20 Naq Qnivq fnvq gb Fbybzba uvf fba, Or fgebat naq bs tbbq
pbhentr, naq qb vg: srne abg, abe or qvfznlrq: sbe gur YBEQ Tbq, rira
zl Tbq, jvyy or jvgu gurr; ur jvyy abg snvy gurr, abe sbefnxr gurr,
hagvy gubh unfg svavfurq nyy gur jbex sbe gur freivpr bs gur ubhfr bs
gur YBEQ.

28:21 Naq, orubyq, gur pbhefrf bs gur cevrfgf naq gur Yrivgrf, rira
gurl funyy or jvgu gurr sbe nyy gur freivpr bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq: naq
gurer funyy or jvgu gurr sbe nyy znaare bs jbexznafuvc rirel jvyyvat
fxvyshy zna, sbe nal znaare bs freivpr: nyfb gur cevaprf naq nyy gur
crbcyr jvyy or jubyyl ng gul pbzznaqzrag.

29:1 Shegurezber Qnivq gur xvat fnvq hagb nyy gur pbatertngvba,
Fbybzba zl fba, jubz nybar Tbq ungu pubfra, vf lrg lbhat naq graqre,
naq gur jbex vf terng: sbe gur cnynpr vf abg sbe zna, ohg sbe gur YBEQ
Tbq.

29:2 Abj V unir cercnerq jvgu nyy zl zvtug sbe gur ubhfr bs zl Tbq gur
tbyq sbe guvatf gb or znqr bs tbyq, naq gur fvyire sbe guvatf bs
fvyire, naq gur oenff sbe guvatf bs oenff, gur veba sbe guvatf bs
veba, naq jbbq sbe guvatf bs jbbq; balk fgbarf, naq fgbarf gb or frg,
tyvfgrevat fgbarf, naq bs qviref pbybhef, naq nyy znaare bs cerpvbhf
fgbarf, naq zneoyr fgbarf va nohaqnapr.

29:3 Zberbire, orpnhfr V unir frg zl nssrpgvba gb gur ubhfr bs zl Tbq,
V unir bs zvar bja cebcre tbbq, bs tbyq naq fvyire, juvpu V unir tvira
gb gur ubhfr bs zl Tbq, bire naq nobir nyy gung V unir cercnerq sbe
gur ubyl ubhfr.

29:4 Rira guerr gubhfnaq gnyragf bs tbyq, bs gur tbyq bs Bcuve, naq
frira gubhfnaq gnyragf bs ersvarq fvyire, gb bireynl gur jnyyf bs gur
ubhfrf jvguny: 29:5 Gur tbyq sbe guvatf bs tbyq, naq gur fvyire sbe
guvatf bs fvyire, naq sbe nyy znaare bs jbex gb or znqr ol gur unaqf
bs negvsvpref. Naq jub gura vf jvyyvat gb pbafrpengr uvf freivpr guvf
qnl hagb gur YBEQ?  29:6 Gura gur puvrs bs gur snguref naq cevaprf bs
gur gevorf bs Vfenry naq gur pncgnvaf bs gubhfnaqf naq bs uhaqerqf,
jvgu gur ehyref bs gur xvat'f jbex, bssrerq jvyyvatyl, 29:7 Naq tnir
sbe gur freivpr bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq bs tbyq svir gubhfnaq gnyragf naq
gra gubhfnaq qenzf, naq bs fvyire gra gubhfnaq gnyragf, naq bs oenff
rvtugrra gubhfnaq gnyragf, naq bar uhaqerq gubhfnaq gnyragf bs veba.

29:8 Naq gurl jvgu jubz cerpvbhf fgbarf jrer sbhaq tnir gurz gb gur
gernfher bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, ol gur unaq bs Wruvry gur
Trefubavgr.

29:9 Gura gur crbcyr erwbvprq, sbe gung gurl bssrerq jvyyvatyl,
orpnhfr jvgu cresrpg urneg gurl bssrerq jvyyvatyl gb gur YBEQ: naq
Qnivq gur xvat nyfb erwbvprq jvgu terng wbl.

29:10 Jurersber Qnivq oyrffrq gur YBEQ orsber nyy gur pbatertngvba:
naq Qnivq fnvq, Oyrffrq or gubh, YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry bhe sngure, sbe
rire naq rire.

29:11 Guvar, B YBEQ vf gur terngarff, naq gur cbjre, naq gur tybel,
naq gur ivpgbel, naq gur znwrfgl: sbe nyy gung vf va gur urnira naq va
gur rnegu vf guvar; guvar vf gur xvatqbz, B YBEQ, naq gubh neg rknygrq
nf urnq nobir nyy.

29:12 Obgu evpurf naq ubabhe pbzr bs gurr, naq gubh ervtarfg bire nyy;
naq va guvar unaq vf cbjre naq zvtug; naq va guvar unaq vg vf gb znxr
terng, naq gb tvir fgeratgu hagb nyy.

29:13 Abj gurersber, bhe Tbq, jr gunax gurr, naq cenvfr gul tybevbhf
anzr.

29:14 Ohg jub nz V, naq jung vf zl crbcyr, gung jr fubhyq or noyr gb
bssre fb jvyyvatyl nsgre guvf fbeg? sbe nyy guvatf pbzr bs gurr, naq
bs guvar bja unir jr tvira gurr.

29:15 Sbe jr ner fgenatref orsber gurr, naq fbwbhearef, nf jrer nyy
bhe snguref: bhe qnlf ba gur rnegu ner nf n funqbj, naq gurer vf abar
novqvat.

29:16 B YBEQ bhe Tbq, nyy guvf fgber gung jr unir cercnerq gb ohvyq
gurr na ubhfr sbe guvar ubyl anzr pbzrgu bs guvar unaq, naq vf nyy
guvar bja.

29:17 V xabj nyfb, zl Tbq, gung gubh gevrfg gur urneg, naq unfg
cyrnfher va hcevtugarff. Nf sbe zr, va gur hcevtugarff bs zvar urneg V
unir jvyyvatyl bssrerq nyy gurfr guvatf: naq abj unir V frra jvgu wbl
gul crbcyr, juvpu ner cerfrag urer, gb bssre jvyyvatyl hagb gurr.

29:18 B YBEQ Tbq bs Noenunz, Vfnnp, naq bs Vfenry, bhe snguref, xrrc
guvf sbe rire va gur vzntvangvba bs gur gubhtugf bs gur urneg bs gul
crbcyr, naq cercner gurve urneg hagb gurr: 29:19 Naq tvir hagb Fbybzba
zl fba n cresrpg urneg, gb xrrc gul pbzznaqzragf, gul grfgvzbavrf, naq
gul fgnghgrf, naq gb qb nyy gurfr guvatf, naq gb ohvyq gur cnynpr, sbe
gur juvpu V unir znqr cebivfvba.

29:20 Naq Qnivq fnvq gb nyy gur pbatertngvba, Abj oyrff gur YBEQ lbhe
Tbq.

Naq nyy gur pbatertngvba oyrffrq gur YBEQ Tbq bs gurve snguref, naq
objrq qbja gurve urnqf, naq jbefuvccrq gur YBEQ, naq gur xvat.

29:21 Naq gurl fnpevsvprq fnpevsvprf hagb gur YBEQ, naq bssrerq oheag
bssrevatf hagb gur YBEQ, ba gur zbeebj nsgre gung qnl, rira n gubhfnaq
ohyybpxf, n gubhfnaq enzf, naq n gubhfnaq ynzof, jvgu gurve qevax
bssrevatf, naq fnpevsvprf va nohaqnapr sbe nyy Vfenry: 29:22 Naq qvq
rng naq qevax orsber gur YBEQ ba gung qnl jvgu terng tynqarff. Naq
gurl znqr Fbybzba gur fba bs Qnivq xvat gur frpbaq gvzr, naq nabvagrq
uvz hagb gur YBEQ gb or gur puvrs tbireabe, naq Mnqbx gb or cevrfg.

29:23 Gura Fbybzba fng ba gur guebar bs gur YBEQ nf xvat vafgrnq bs
Qnivq uvf sngure, naq cebfcrerq; naq nyy Vfenry borlrq uvz.

29:24 Naq nyy gur cevaprf, naq gur zvtugl zra, naq nyy gur fbaf
yvxrjvfr bs xvat Qnivq, fhozvggrq gurzfryirf hagb Fbybzba gur xvat.

29:25 Naq gur YBEQ zntavsvrq Fbybzba rkprrqvatyl va gur fvtug bs nyy
Vfenry, naq orfgbjrq hcba uvz fhpu eblny znwrfgl nf unq abg orra ba
nal xvat orsber uvz va Vfenry.

29:26 Guhf Qnivq gur fba bs Wrffr ervtarq bire nyy Vfenry.

29:27 Naq gur gvzr gung ur ervtarq bire Vfenry jnf sbegl lrnef; frira
lrnef ervtarq ur va Uroeba, naq guvegl naq guerr lrnef ervtarq ur va
Wrehfnyrz.

29:28 Naq ur qvrq va n tbbq byq ntr, shyy bs qnlf, evpurf, naq ubabhe:
naq Fbybzba uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

29:29 Abj gur npgf bs Qnivq gur xvat, svefg naq ynfg, orubyq, gurl ner
jevggra va gur obbx bs Fnzhry gur frre, naq va gur obbx bs Anguna gur
cebcurg, naq va gur obbx bs Tnq gur frre, 29:30 Jvgu nyy uvf ervta naq
uvf zvtug, naq gur gvzrf gung jrag bire uvz, naq bire Vfenry, naq bire
nyy gur xvatqbzf bs gur pbhagevrf.




Gur Frpbaq Obbx bs gur Puebavpyrf


1:1 Naq Fbybzba gur fba bs Qnivq jnf fgeratgurarq va uvf xvatqbz, naq
gur YBEQ uvf Tbq jnf jvgu uvz, naq zntavsvrq uvz rkprrqvatyl.

1:2 Gura Fbybzba fcnxr hagb nyy Vfenry, gb gur pncgnvaf bs gubhfnaqf
naq bs uhaqerqf, naq gb gur whqtrf, naq gb rirel tbireabe va nyy
Vfenry, gur puvrs bs gur snguref.

1:3 Fb Fbybzba, naq nyy gur pbatertngvba jvgu uvz, jrag gb gur uvtu
cynpr gung jnf ng Tvorba; sbe gurer jnf gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba bs Tbq, juvpu Zbfrf gur freinag bs gur YBEQ unq znqr va
gur jvyqrearff.

1:4 Ohg gur nex bs Tbq unq Qnivq oebhtug hc sebz Xvewnguwrnevz gb gur
cynpr juvpu Qnivq unq cercnerq sbe vg: sbe ur unq cvgpurq n grag sbe
vg ng Wrehfnyrz.

1:5 Zberbire gur oenfra nygne, gung Ormnyrry gur fba bs Hev, gur fba
bs Uhe, unq znqr, ur chg orsber gur gnoreanpyr bs gur YBEQ: naq
Fbybzba naq gur pbatertngvba fbhtug hagb vg.

1:6 Naq Fbybzba jrag hc guvgure gb gur oenfra nygne orsber gur YBEQ,
juvpu jnf ng gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba, naq bssrerq n
gubhfnaq oheag bssrevatf hcba vg.

1:7 Va gung avtug qvq Tbq nccrne hagb Fbybzba, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Nfx
jung V funyy tvir gurr.

1:8 Naq Fbybzba fnvq hagb Tbq, Gubh unfg furjrq terng zrepl hagb Qnivq
zl sngure, naq unfg znqr zr gb ervta va uvf fgrnq.

1:9 Abj, B YBEQ Tbq, yrg gul cebzvfr hagb Qnivq zl sngure or
rfgnoyvfurq: sbe gubh unfg znqr zr xvat bire n crbcyr yvxr gur qhfg bs
gur rnegu va zhygvghqr.

1:10 Tvir zr abj jvfqbz naq xabjyrqtr, gung V znl tb bhg naq pbzr va
orsber guvf crbcyr: sbe jub pna whqtr guvf gul crbcyr, gung vf fb
terng?  1:11 Naq Tbq fnvq gb Fbybzba, Orpnhfr guvf jnf va guvar urneg,
naq gubh unfg abg nfxrq evpurf, jrnygu, be ubabhe, abe gur yvsr bs
guvar rarzvrf, arvgure lrg unfg nfxrq ybat yvsr; ohg unfg nfxrq jvfqbz
naq xabjyrqtr sbe gulfrys, gung gubh znlrfg whqtr zl crbcyr, bire jubz
V unir znqr gurr xvat: 1:12 Jvfqbz naq xabjyrqtr vf tenagrq hagb gurr;
naq V jvyy tvir gurr evpurf, naq jrnygu, naq ubabhe, fhpu nf abar bs
gur xvatf unir unq gung unir orra orsber gurr, arvgure funyy gurer nal
nsgre gurr unir gur yvxr.

1:13 Gura Fbybzba pnzr sebz uvf wbhearl gb gur uvtu cynpr gung jnf ng
Tvorba gb Wrehfnyrz, sebz orsber gur gnoreanpyr bs gur pbatertngvba,
naq ervtarq bire Vfenry.

1:14 Naq Fbybzba tngurerq punevbgf naq ubefrzra: naq ur unq n gubhfnaq
naq sbhe uhaqerq punevbgf, naq gjryir gubhfnaq ubefrzra, juvpu ur
cynprq va gur punevbg pvgvrf, naq jvgu gur xvat ng Wrehfnyrz.

1:15 Naq gur xvat znqr fvyire naq tbyq ng Wrehfnyrz nf cyragrbhf nf
fgbarf, naq prqne gerrf znqr ur nf gur flpbzber gerrf gung ner va gur
inyr sbe nohaqnapr.

1:16 Naq Fbybzba unq ubefrf oebhtug bhg bs Rtlcg, naq yvara lnea: gur
xvat'f zrepunagf erprvirq gur yvara lnea ng n cevpr.

1:17 Naq gurl srgpurq hc, naq oebhtug sbegu bhg bs Rtlcg n punevbg sbe
fvk uhaqerq furxryf bs fvyire, naq na ubefr sbe na uhaqerq naq svsgl:
naq fb oebhtug gurl bhg ubefrf sbe nyy gur xvatf bs gur Uvggvgrf, naq
sbe gur xvatf bs Flevn, ol gurve zrnaf.

2:1 Naq Fbybzba qrgrezvarq gb ohvyq na ubhfr sbe gur anzr bs gur YBEQ,
naq na ubhfr sbe uvf xvatqbz.

2:2 Naq Fbybzba gbyq bhg guerrfpber naq gra gubhfnaq zra gb orne
oheqraf, naq sbhefpber gubhfnaq gb urj va gur zbhagnva, naq guerr
gubhfnaq naq fvk uhaqerq gb birefrr gurz.

2:3 Naq Fbybzba frag gb Uhenz gur xvat bs Gler, fnlvat, Nf gubh qvqfg
qrny jvgu Qnivq zl sngure, naq qvqfg fraq uvz prqnef gb ohvyq uvz na
ubhfr gb qjryy gurerva, rira fb qrny jvgu zr.

2:4 Orubyq, V ohvyq na ubhfr gb gur anzr bs gur YBEQ zl Tbq, gb
qrqvpngr vg gb uvz, naq gb ohea orsber uvz fjrrg vaprafr, naq sbe gur
pbagvahny furjoernq, naq sbe gur oheag bssrevatf zbeavat naq riravat,
ba gur fnoonguf, naq ba gur arj zbbaf, naq ba gur fbyrza srnfgf bs gur
YBEQ bhe Tbq. Guvf vf na beqvanapr sbe rire gb Vfenry.

2:5 Naq gur ubhfr juvpu V ohvyq vf terng: sbe terng vf bhe Tbq nobir
nyy tbqf.

2:6 Ohg jub vf noyr gb ohvyq uvz na ubhfr, frrvat gur urnira naq
urnira bs urniraf pnaabg pbagnva uvz? jub nz V gura, gung V fubhyq
ohvyq uvz na ubhfr, fnir bayl gb ohea fnpevsvpr orsber uvz?  2:7 Fraq
zr abj gurersber n zna phaavat gb jbex va tbyq, naq va fvyire, naq va
oenff, naq va veba, naq va checyr, naq pevzfba, naq oyhr, naq gung pna
fxvyy gb tenir jvgu gur phaavat zra gung ner jvgu zr va Whqnu naq va
Wrehfnyrz, jubz Qnivq zl sngure qvq cebivqr.

2:8 Fraq zr nyfb prqne gerrf, sve gerrf, naq nythz gerrf, bhg bs
Yronaba: sbe V xabj gung gul freinagf pna fxvyy gb phg gvzore va
Yronaba; naq, orubyq, zl freinagf funyy or jvgu gul freinagf, 2:9 Rira
gb cercner zr gvzore va nohaqnapr: sbe gur ubhfr juvpu V nz nobhg gb
ohvyq funyy or jbaqreshy terng.

2:10 Naq, orubyq, V jvyy tvir gb gul freinagf, gur urjref gung phg
gvzore, gjragl gubhfnaq zrnfherf bs orngra jurng, naq gjragl gubhfnaq
zrnfherf bs oneyrl, naq gjragl gubhfnaq onguf bs jvar, naq gjragl
gubhfnaq onguf bs bvy.

2:11 Gura Uhenz gur xvat bs Gler nafjrerq va jevgvat, juvpu ur frag gb
Fbybzba, Orpnhfr gur YBEQ ungu ybirq uvf crbcyr, ur ungu znqr gurr
xvat bire gurz.

2:12 Uhenz fnvq zberbire, Oyrffrq or gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, gung znqr
urnira naq rnegu, jub ungu tvira gb Qnivq gur xvat n jvfr fba, raqhrq
jvgu cehqrapr naq haqrefgnaqvat, gung zvtug ohvyq na ubhfr sbe gur
YBEQ, naq na ubhfr sbe uvf xvatqbz.

2:13 Naq abj V unir frag n phaavat zna, raqhrq jvgu haqrefgnaqvat, bs
Uhenz zl sngure'f, 2:14 Gur fba bs n jbzna bs gur qnhtugref bs Qna,
naq uvf sngure jnf n zna bs Gler, fxvyshy gb jbex va tbyq, naq va
fvyire, va oenff, va veba, va fgbar, naq va gvzore, va checyr, va
oyhr, naq va svar yvara, naq va pevzfba; nyfb gb tenir nal znaare bs
tenivat, naq gb svaq bhg rirel qrivpr juvpu funyy or chg gb uvz, jvgu
gul phaavat zra, naq jvgu gur phaavat zra bs zl ybeq Qnivq gul sngure.

2:15 Abj gurersber gur jurng, naq gur oneyrl, gur bvy, naq gur jvar,
juvpu zl ybeq ungu fcbxra bs, yrg uvz fraq hagb uvf freinagf: 2:16 Naq
jr jvyy phg jbbq bhg bs Yronaba, nf zhpu nf gubh funyg arrq: naq jr
jvyy oevat vg gb gurr va sybngf ol frn gb Wbccn; naq gubh funyg pneel
vg hc gb Wrehfnyrz.

2:17 Naq Fbybzba ahzorerq nyy gur fgenatref gung jrer va gur ynaq bs
Vfenry, nsgre gur ahzorevat jurerjvgu Qnivq uvf sngure unq ahzorerq
gurz; naq gurl jrer sbhaq na uhaqerq naq svsgl gubhfnaq naq guerr
gubhfnaq naq fvk uhaqerq.

2:18 Naq ur frg guerrfpber naq gra gubhfnaq bs gurz gb or orneref bs
oheqraf, naq sbhefpber gubhfnaq gb or urjref va gur zbhagnva, naq
guerr gubhfnaq naq fvk uhaqerq birefrref gb frg gur crbcyr n jbex.

3:1 Gura Fbybzba ortna gb ohvyq gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ ng Wrehfnyrz va
zbhag Zbevnu, jurer gur Ybeq nccrnerq hagb Qnivq uvf sngure, va gur
cynpr gung Qnivq unq cercnerq va gur guerfuvatsybbe bs Beana gur
Wrohfvgr.

3:2 Naq ur ortna gb ohvyq va gur frpbaq qnl bs gur frpbaq zbagu, va
gur sbhegu lrne bs uvf ervta.

3:3 Abj gurfr ner gur guvatf jurerva Fbybzba jnf vafgehpgrq sbe gur
ohvyqvat bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq. Gur yratgu ol phovgf nsgre gur svefg
zrnfher jnf guerrfpber phovgf, naq gur oernqgu gjragl phovgf.

3:4 Naq gur cbepu gung jnf va gur sebag bs gur ubhfr, gur yratgu bs vg
jnf nppbeqvat gb gur oernqgu bs gur ubhfr, gjragl phovgf, naq gur
urvtug jnf na uhaqerq naq gjragl: naq ur bireynvq vg jvguva jvgu cher
tbyq.

3:5 Naq gur terngre ubhfr ur pvryrq jvgu sve gerr, juvpu ur bireynvq
jvgu svar tbyq, naq frg gurerba cnyz gerrf naq punvaf.

3:6 Naq ur tneavfurq gur ubhfr jvgu cerpvbhf fgbarf sbe ornhgl: naq
gur tbyq jnf tbyq bs Cneinvz.

3:7 Ur bireynvq nyfb gur ubhfr, gur ornzf, gur cbfgf, naq gur jnyyf
gurerbs, naq gur qbbef gurerbs, jvgu tbyq; naq tenirq purehovzf ba gur
jnyyf.

3:8 Naq ur znqr gur zbfg ubyl ubhfr, gur yratgu jurerbs jnf nppbeqvat
gb gur oernqgu bs gur ubhfr, gjragl phovgf, naq gur oernqgu gurerbs
gjragl phovgf: naq ur bireynvq vg jvgu svar tbyq, nzbhagvat gb fvk
uhaqerq gnyragf.

3:9 Naq gur jrvtug bs gur anvyf jnf svsgl furxryf bs tbyq. Naq ur
bireynvq gur hccre punzoref jvgu tbyq.

3:10 Naq va gur zbfg ubyl ubhfr ur znqr gjb purehovzf bs vzntr jbex,
naq bireynvq gurz jvgu tbyq.

3:11 Naq gur jvatf bs gur purehovzf jrer gjragl phovgf ybat: bar jvat
bs gur bar pureho jnf svir phovgf, ernpuvat gb gur jnyy bs gur ubhfr:
naq gur bgure jvat jnf yvxrjvfr svir phovgf, ernpuvat gb gur jvat bs
gur bgure pureho.

3:12 Naq bar jvat bs gur bgure pureho jnf svir phovgf, ernpuvat gb gur
jnyy bs gur ubhfr: naq gur bgure jvat jnf svir phovgf nyfb, wbvavat gb
gur jvat bs gur bgure pureho.

3:13 Gur jvatf bs gurfr purehovzf fcernq gurzfryirf sbegu gjragl
phovgf: naq gurl fgbbq ba gurve srrg, naq gurve snprf jrer vajneq.

3:14 Naq ur znqr gur invy bs oyhr, naq checyr, naq pevzfba, naq svar
yvara, naq jebhtug purehovzf gurerba.

3:15 Nyfb ur znqr orsber gur ubhfr gjb cvyynef bs guvegl naq svir
phovgf uvtu, naq gur puncvgre gung jnf ba gur gbc bs rnpu bs gurz jnf
svir phovgf.

3:16 Naq ur znqr punvaf, nf va gur benpyr, naq chg gurz ba gur urnqf
bs gur cvyynef; naq znqr na uhaqerq cbzrtenangrf, naq chg gurz ba gur
punvaf.

3:17 Naq ur ernerq hc gur cvyynef orsber gur grzcyr, bar ba gur evtug
unaq, naq gur bgure ba gur yrsg; naq pnyyrq gur anzr bs gung ba gur
evtug unaq Wnpuva, naq gur anzr bs gung ba gur yrsg Obnm.

4:1 Zberbire ur znqr na nygne bs oenff, gjragl phovgf gur yratgu
gurerbs, naq gjragl phovgf gur oernqgu gurerbs, naq gra phovgf gur
urvtug gurerbs.

4:2 Nyfb ur znqr n zbygra frn bs gra phovgf sebz oevz gb oevz, ebhaq
va pbzcnff, naq svir phovgf gur urvtug gurerbs; naq n yvar bs guvegl
phovgf qvq pbzcnff vg ebhaq nobhg.

4:3 Naq haqre vg jnf gur fvzvyvghqr bs bkra, juvpu qvq pbzcnff vg
ebhaq nobhg: gra va n phovg, pbzcnffvat gur frn ebhaq nobhg. Gjb ebjf
bs bkra jrer pnfg, jura vg jnf pnfg.

4:4 Vg fgbbq hcba gjryir bkra, guerr ybbxvat gbjneq gur abegu, naq
guerr ybbxvat gbjneq gur jrfg, naq guerr ybbxvat gbjneq gur fbhgu, naq
guerr ybbxvat gbjneq gur rnfg: naq gur frn jnf frg nobir hcba gurz,
naq nyy gurve uvaqre cnegf jrer vajneq.

4:5 Naq gur guvpxarff bs vg jnf na unaqoernqgu, naq gur oevz bs vg
yvxr gur jbex bs gur oevz bs n phc, jvgu sybjref bs yvyvrf; naq vg
erprvirq naq uryq guerr gubhfnaq onguf.

4:6 Ur znqr nyfb gra yniref, naq chg svir ba gur evtug unaq, naq svir
ba gur yrsg, gb jnfu va gurz: fhpu guvatf nf gurl bssrerq sbe gur
oheag bssrevat gurl jnfurq va gurz; ohg gur frn jnf sbe gur cevrfgf gb
jnfu va.

4:7 Naq ur znqr gra pnaqyrfgvpxf bs tbyq nppbeqvat gb gurve sbez, naq
frg gurz va gur grzcyr, svir ba gur evtug unaq, naq svir ba gur yrsg.

4:8 Ur znqr nyfb gra gnoyrf, naq cynprq gurz va gur grzcyr, svir ba
gur evtug fvqr, naq svir ba gur yrsg. Naq ur znqr na uhaqerq onfbaf bs
tbyq.

4:9 Shegurezber ur znqr gur pbheg bs gur cevrfgf, naq gur terng pbheg,
naq qbbef sbe gur pbheg, naq bireynvq gur qbbef bs gurz jvgu oenff.

4:10 Naq ur frg gur frn ba gur evtug fvqr bs gur rnfg raq, bire
ntnvafg gur fbhgu.

4:11 Naq Uhenz znqr gur cbgf, naq gur fubiryf, naq gur onfbaf. Naq
Uhenz svavfurq gur jbex gung ur jnf gb znxr sbe xvat Fbybzba sbe gur
ubhfr bs Tbq; 4:12 Gb jvg, gur gjb cvyynef, naq gur cbzzryf, naq gur
puncvgref juvpu jrer ba gur gbc bs gur gjb cvyynef, naq gur gjb
jernguf gb pbire gur gjb cbzzryf bs gur puncvgref juvpu jrer ba gur
gbc bs gur cvyynef; 4:13 Naq sbhe uhaqerq cbzrtenangrf ba gur gjb
jernguf; gjb ebjf bs cbzrtenangrf ba rnpu jerngu, gb pbire gur gjb
cbzzryf bs gur puncvgref juvpu jrer hcba gur cvyynef.

4:14 Ur znqr nyfb onfrf, naq yniref znqr ur hcba gur onfrf; 4:15 Bar
frn, naq gjryir bkra haqre vg.

4:16 Gur cbgf nyfb, naq gur fubiryf, naq gur syrfuubbxf, naq nyy gurve
vafgehzragf, qvq Uhenz uvf sngure znxr gb xvat Fbybzba sbe gur ubhfr
bs gur YBEQ bs oevtug oenff.

4:17 Va gur cynva bs Wbeqna qvq gur xvat pnfg gurz, va gur pynl tebhaq
orgjrra Fhppbgu naq Mrerqngunu.

4:18 Guhf Fbybzba znqr nyy gurfr irffryf va terng nohaqnapr: sbe gur
jrvtug bs gur oenff pbhyq abg or sbhaq bhg.

4:19 Naq Fbybzba znqr nyy gur irffryf gung jrer sbe gur ubhfr bs Tbq,
gur tbyqra nygne nyfb, naq gur gnoyrf jurerba gur furjoernq jnf frg;
4:20 Zberbire gur pnaqyrfgvpxf jvgu gurve ynzcf, gung gurl fubhyq ohea
nsgre gur znaare orsber gur benpyr, bs cher tbyq; 4:21 Naq gur
sybjref, naq gur ynzcf, naq gur gbatf, znqr ur bs tbyq, naq gung
cresrpg tbyq; 4:22 Naq gur fahssref, naq gur onfbaf, naq gur fcbbaf,
naq gur prafref, bs cher tbyq: naq gur ragel bs gur ubhfr, gur vaare
qbbef gurerbs sbe gur zbfg ubyl cynpr, naq gur qbbef bs gur ubhfr bs
gur grzcyr, jrer bs tbyq.

5:1 Guhf nyy gur jbex gung Fbybzba znqr sbe gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ jnf
svavfurq: naq Fbybzba oebhtug va nyy gur guvatf gung Qnivq uvf sngure
unq qrqvpngrq; naq gur fvyire, naq gur tbyq, naq nyy gur vafgehzragf,
chg ur nzbat gur gernfherf bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq.

5:2 Gura Fbybzba nffrzoyrq gur ryqref bs Vfenry, naq nyy gur urnqf bs
gur gevorf, gur puvrs bs gur snguref bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, hagb
Wrehfnyrz, gb oevat hc gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ bhg bs gur
pvgl bs Qnivq, juvpu vf Mvba.

5:3 Jurersber nyy gur zra bs Vfenry nffrzoyrq gurzfryirf hagb gur xvat
va gur srnfg juvpu jnf va gur friragu zbagu.

5:4 Naq nyy gur ryqref bs Vfenry pnzr; naq gur Yrivgrf gbbx hc gur
nex.

5:5 Naq gurl oebhtug hc gur nex, naq gur gnoreanpyr bs gur
pbatertngvba, naq nyy gur ubyl irffryf gung jrer va gur gnoreanpyr,
gurfr qvq gur cevrfgf naq gur Yrivgrf oevat hc.

5:6 Nyfb xvat Fbybzba, naq nyy gur pbatertngvba bs Vfenry gung jrer
nffrzoyrq hagb uvz orsber gur nex, fnpevsvprq furrc naq bkra, juvpu
pbhyq abg or gbyq abe ahzorerq sbe zhygvghqr.

5:7 Naq gur cevrfgf oebhtug va gur nex bs gur pbiranag bs gur YBEQ
hagb uvf cynpr, gb gur benpyr bs gur ubhfr, vagb gur zbfg ubyl cynpr,
rira haqre gur jvatf bs gur purehovzf: 5:8 Sbe gur purehovzf fcernq
sbegu gurve jvatf bire gur cynpr bs gur nex, naq gur purehovzf pbirerq
gur nex naq gur fgnirf gurerbs nobir.

5:9 Naq gurl qerj bhg gur fgnirf bs gur nex, gung gur raqf bs gur
fgnirf jrer frra sebz gur nex orsber gur benpyr; ohg gurl jrer abg
frra jvgubhg. Naq gurer vg vf hagb guvf qnl.

5:10 Gurer jnf abguvat va gur nex fnir gur gjb gnoyrf juvpu Zbfrf chg
gurerva ng Ubero, jura gur YBEQ znqr n pbiranag jvgu gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry, jura gurl pnzr bhg bs Rtlcg.

5:11 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur cevrfgf jrer pbzr bhg bs gur ubyl
cynpr: (sbe nyy gur cevrfgf gung jrer cerfrag jrer fnapgvsvrq, naq qvq
abg gura jnvg ol pbhefr: 5:12 Nyfb gur Yrivgrf juvpu jrer gur fvatref,
nyy bs gurz bs Nfncu, bs Urzna, bs Wrqhguha, jvgu gurve fbaf naq gurve
oerguera, orvat neenlrq va juvgr yvara, univat plzonyf naq cfnygrevrf
naq unecf, fgbbq ng gur rnfg raq bs gur nygne, naq jvgu gurz na
uhaqerq naq gjragl cevrfgf fbhaqvat jvgu gehzcrgf:) 5:13 Vg pnzr rira
gb cnff, nf gur gehzcrgref naq fvatref jrer nf bar, gb znxr bar fbhaq
gb or urneq va cenvfvat naq gunaxvat gur YBEQ; naq jura gurl yvsgrq hc
gurve ibvpr jvgu gur gehzcrgf naq plzonyf naq vafgehzragf bs zhfvpx,
naq cenvfrq gur YBEQ, fnlvat, Sbe ur vf tbbq; sbe uvf zrepl raqhergu
sbe rire: gung gura gur ubhfr jnf svyyrq jvgu n pybhq, rira gur ubhfr
bs gur YBEQ; 5:14 Fb gung gur cevrfgf pbhyq abg fgnaq gb zvavfgre ol
ernfba bs gur pybhq: sbe gur tybel bs gur YBEQ unq svyyrq gur ubhfr bs
Tbq.

6:1 Gura fnvq Fbybzba, Gur YBEQ ungu fnvq gung ur jbhyq qjryy va gur
guvpx qnexarff.

6:2 Ohg V unir ohvyg na ubhfr bs unovgngvba sbe gurr, naq n cynpr sbe
gul qjryyvat sbe rire.

6:3 Naq gur xvat ghearq uvf snpr, naq oyrffrq gur jubyr pbatertngvba
bs Vfenry: naq nyy gur pbatertngvba bs Vfenry fgbbq.

6:4 Naq ur fnvq, Oyrffrq or gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, jub ungu jvgu uvf
unaqf shysvyyrq gung juvpu ur fcnxr jvgu uvf zbhgu gb zl sngure Qnivq,
fnlvat, 6:5 Fvapr gur qnl gung V oebhtug sbegu zl crbcyr bhg bs gur
ynaq bs Rtlcg V pubfr ab pvgl nzbat nyy gur gevorf bs Vfenry gb ohvyq
na ubhfr va, gung zl anzr zvtug or gurer; arvgure pubfr V nal zna gb
or n ehyre bire zl crbcyr Vfenry: 6:6 Ohg V unir pubfra Wrehfnyrz,
gung zl anzr zvtug or gurer; naq unir pubfra Qnivq gb or bire zl
crbcyr Vfenry.

6:7 Abj vg jnf va gur urneg bs Qnivq zl sngure gb ohvyq na ubhfr sbe
gur anzr bs gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry.

6:8 Ohg gur YBEQ fnvq gb Qnivq zl sngure, Sbenfzhpu nf vg jnf va guvar
urneg gb ohvyq na ubhfr sbe zl anzr, gubh qvqfg jryy va gung vg jnf va
guvar urneg: 6:9 Abgjvgufgnaqvat gubh funyg abg ohvyq gur ubhfr; ohg
gul fba juvpu funyy pbzr sbegu bhg bs gul ybvaf, ur funyy ohvyq gur
ubhfr sbe zl anzr.

6:10 Gur YBEQ gurersber ungu cresbezrq uvf jbeq gung ur ungu fcbxra:
sbe V nz evfra hc va gur ebbz bs Qnivq zl sngure, naq nz frg ba gur
guebar bs Vfenry, nf gur YBEQ cebzvfrq, naq unir ohvyg gur ubhfr sbe
gur anzr bs gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry.

6:11 Naq va vg unir V chg gur nex, jurerva vf gur pbiranag bs gur
YBEQ, gung ur znqr jvgu gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

6:12 Naq ur fgbbq orsber gur nygne bs gur YBEQ va gur cerfrapr bs nyy
gur pbatertngvba bs Vfenry, naq fcernq sbegu uvf unaqf: 6:13 Sbe
Fbybzba unq znqr n oenfra fpnssbyq bs svir phovgf ybat, naq svir
phovgf oebnq, naq guerr phovgf uvtu, naq unq frg vg va gur zvqfg bs
gur pbheg: naq hcba vg ur fgbbq, naq xarryrq qbja hcba uvf xarrf
orsber nyy gur pbatertngvba bs Vfenry, naq fcernq sbegu uvf unaqf
gbjneq urnira.

6:14 Naq fnvq, B YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, gurer vf ab Tbq yvxr gurr va gur
urnira, abe va gur rnegu; juvpu xrrcrfg pbiranag, naq furjrfg zrepl
hagb gul freinagf, gung jnyx orsber gurr jvgu nyy gurve urnegf: 6:15
Gubh juvpu unfg xrcg jvgu gul freinag Qnivq zl sngure gung juvpu gubh
unfg cebzvfrq uvz; naq fcnxrfg jvgu gul zbhgu, naq unfg shysvyyrq vg
jvgu guvar unaq, nf vg vf guvf qnl.

6:16 Abj gurersber, B YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, xrrc jvgu gul freinag Qnivq
zl sngure gung juvpu gubh unfg cebzvfrq uvz, fnlvat, Gurer funyy abg
snvy gurr n zna va zl fvtug gb fvg hcba gur guebar bs Vfenry; lrg fb
gung gul puvyqera gnxr urrq gb gurve jnl gb jnyx va zl ynj, nf gubh
unfg jnyxrq orsber zr.

6:17 Abj gura, B YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, yrg gul jbeq or irevsvrq, juvpu
gubh unfg fcbxra hagb gul freinag Qnivq.

6:18 Ohg jvyy Tbq va irel qrrq qjryy jvgu zra ba gur rnegu? orubyq,
urnira naq gur urnira bs urniraf pnaabg pbagnva gurr; ubj zhpu yrff
guvf ubhfr juvpu V unir ohvyg!  6:19 Unir erfcrpg gurersber gb gur
cenlre bs gul freinag, naq gb uvf fhccyvpngvba, B YBEQ zl Tbq, gb
urnexra hagb gur pel naq gur cenlre juvpu gul freinag cenlrgu orsber
gurr: 6:20 Gung guvar rlrf znl or bcra hcba guvf ubhfr qnl naq avtug,
hcba gur cynpr jurerbs gubh unfg fnvq gung gubh jbhyqrfg chg gul anzr
gurer; gb urnexra hagb gur cenlre juvpu gul freinag cenlrgu gbjneq
guvf cynpr.

6:21 Urnexra gurersber hagb gur fhccyvpngvbaf bs gul freinag, naq bs
gul crbcyr Vfenry, juvpu gurl funyy znxr gbjneq guvf cynpr: urne gubh
sebz gul qjryyvat cynpr, rira sebz urnira; naq jura gubh urnerfg,
sbetvir.

6:22 Vs n zna fva ntnvafg uvf arvtuobhe, naq na bngu or ynvq hcba uvz
gb znxr uvz fjrne, naq gur bngu pbzr orsber guvar nygne va guvf ubhfr;
6:23 Gura urne gubh sebz urnira, naq qb, naq whqtr gul freinagf, ol
erdhvgvat gur jvpxrq, ol erpbzcrafvat uvf jnl hcba uvf bja urnq; naq
ol whfgvslvat gur evtugrbhf, ol tvivat uvz nppbeqvat gb uvf
evtugrbhfarff.

6:24 Naq vs gul crbcyr Vfenry or chg gb gur jbefr orsber gur rarzl,
orpnhfr gurl unir fvaarq ntnvafg gurr; naq funyy erghea naq pbasrff
gul anzr, naq cenl naq znxr fhccyvpngvba orsber gurr va guvf ubhfr;
6:25 Gura urne gubh sebz gur urniraf, naq sbetvir gur fva bs gul
crbcyr Vfenry, naq oevat gurz ntnva hagb gur ynaq juvpu gubh tnirfg gb
gurz naq gb gurve snguref.

6:26 Jura gur urnira vf fuhg hc, naq gurer vf ab enva, orpnhfr gurl
unir fvaarq ntnvafg gurr; lrg vs gurl cenl gbjneq guvf cynpr, naq
pbasrff gul anzr, naq ghea sebz gurve fva, jura gubh qbfg nssyvpg
gurz; 6:27 Gura urne gubh sebz urnira, naq sbetvir gur fva bs gul
freinagf, naq bs gul crbcyr Vfenry, jura gubh unfg gnhtug gurz gur
tbbq jnl, jurerva gurl fubhyq jnyx; naq fraq enva hcba gul ynaq, juvpu
gubh unfg tvira hagb gul crbcyr sbe na vaurevgnapr.

6:28 Vs gurer or qrnegu va gur ynaq, vs gurer or crfgvyrapr, vs gurer
or oynfgvat, be zvyqrj, ybphfgf, be pngrecvyyref; vs gurve rarzvrf
orfvrtr gurz va gur pvgvrf bs gurve ynaq; jungfbrire fber be
jungfbrire fvpxarff gurer or: 6:29 Gura jung cenlre be jung
fhccyvpngvba fbrire funyy or znqr bs nal zna, be bs nyy gul crbcyr
Vfenry, jura rirel bar funyy xabj uvf bja fber naq uvf bja tevrs, naq
funyy fcernq sbegu uvf unaqf va guvf ubhfr: 6:30 Gura urne gubh sebz
urnira gul qjryyvat cynpr, naq sbetvir, naq eraqre hagb rirel zna
nppbeqvat hagb nyy uvf jnlf, jubfr urneg gubh xabjrfg; (sbe gubh bayl
xabjrfg gur urnegf bs gur puvyqera bs zra:) 6:31 Gung gurl znl srne
gurr, gb jnyx va gul jnlf, fb ybat nf gurl yvir va gur ynaq juvpu gubh
tnirfg hagb bhe snguref.

6:32 Zberbire pbapreavat gur fgenatre, juvpu vf abg bs gul crbcyr
Vfenry, ohg vf pbzr sebz n sne pbhagel sbe gul terng anzr'f fnxr, naq
gul zvtugl unaq, naq gul fgergpurq bhg nez; vs gurl pbzr naq cenl va
guvf ubhfr; 6:33 Gura urne gubh sebz gur urniraf, rira sebz gul
qjryyvat cynpr, naq qb nppbeqvat gb nyy gung gur fgenatre pnyyrgu gb
gurr sbe; gung nyy crbcyr bs gur rnegu znl xabj gul anzr, naq srne
gurr, nf qbgu gul crbcyr Vfenry, naq znl xabj gung guvf ubhfr juvpu V
unir ohvyg vf pnyyrq ol gul anzr.

6:34 Vs gul crbcyr tb bhg gb jne ntnvafg gurve rarzvrf ol gur jnl gung
gubh funyg fraq gurz, naq gurl cenl hagb gurr gbjneq guvf pvgl juvpu
gubh unfg pubfra, naq gur ubhfr juvpu V unir ohvyg sbe gul anzr; 6:35
Gura urne gubh sebz gur urniraf gurve cenlre naq gurve fhccyvpngvba,
naq znvagnva gurve pnhfr.

6:36 Vs gurl fva ntnvafg gurr, (sbe gurer vf ab zna juvpu fvaargu
abg,) naq gubh or natel jvgu gurz, naq qryvire gurz bire orsber gurve
rarzvrf, naq gurl pneel gurz njnl pncgvirf hagb n ynaq sne bss be
arne; 6:37 Lrg vs gurl orguvax gurzfryirf va gur ynaq juvgure gurl ner
pneevrq pncgvir, naq ghea naq cenl hagb gurr va gur ynaq bs gurve
pncgvivgl, fnlvat, Jr unir fvaarq, jr unir qbar nzvff, naq unir qrnyg
jvpxrqyl; 6:38 Vs gurl erghea gb gurr jvgu nyy gurve urneg naq jvgu
nyy gurve fbhy va gur ynaq bs gurve pncgvivgl, juvgure gurl unir
pneevrq gurz pncgvirf, naq cenl gbjneq gurve ynaq, juvpu gubh tnirfg
hagb gurve snguref, naq gbjneq gur pvgl juvpu gubh unfg pubfra, naq
gbjneq gur ubhfr juvpu V unir ohvyg sbe gul anzr: 6:39 Gura urne gubh
sebz gur urniraf, rira sebz gul qjryyvat cynpr, gurve cenlre naq gurve
fhccyvpngvbaf, naq znvagnva gurve pnhfr, naq sbetvir gul crbcyr juvpu
unir fvaarq ntnvafg gurr.

6:40 Abj, zl Tbq, yrg, V orfrrpu gurr, guvar rlrf or bcra, naq yrg
guvar rnef or nggrag hagb gur cenlre gung vf znqr va guvf cynpr.

6:41 Abj gurersber nevfr, B YBEQ Tbq, vagb gul erfgvat cynpr, gubh,
naq gur nex bs gul fgeratgu: yrg gul cevrfgf, B YBEQ Tbq, or pybgurq
jvgu fnyingvba, naq yrg gul fnvagf erwbvpr va tbbqarff.

6:42 B YBEQ Tbq, ghea abg njnl gur snpr bs guvar nabvagrq: erzrzore
gur zrepvrf bs Qnivq gul freinag.

7:1 Abj jura Fbybzba unq znqr na raq bs cenlvat, gur sver pnzr qbja
sebz urnira, naq pbafhzrq gur oheag bssrevat naq gur fnpevsvprf; naq
gur tybel bs gur YBEQ svyyrq gur ubhfr.

7:2 Naq gur cevrfgf pbhyq abg ragre vagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ,
orpnhfr gur tybel bs gur YBEQ unq svyyrq gur YBEQ'f ubhfr.

7:3 Naq jura nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry fnj ubj gur sver pnzr qbja,
naq gur tybel bs gur YBEQ hcba gur ubhfr, gurl objrq gurzfryirf jvgu
gurve snprf gb gur tebhaq hcba gur cnirzrag, naq jbefuvccrq, naq
cenvfrq gur YBEQ, fnlvat, Sbe ur vf tbbq; sbe uvf zrepl raqhergu sbe
rire.

7:4 Gura gur xvat naq nyy gur crbcyr bssrerq fnpevsvprf orsber gur
YBEQ.

7:5 Naq xvat Fbybzba bssrerq n fnpevsvpr bs gjragl naq gjb gubhfnaq
bkra, naq na uhaqerq naq gjragl gubhfnaq furrc: fb gur xvat naq nyy
gur crbcyr qrqvpngrq gur ubhfr bs Tbq.

7:6 Naq gur cevrfgf jnvgrq ba gurve bssvprf: gur Yrivgrf nyfb jvgu
vafgehzragf bs zhfvpx bs gur YBEQ, juvpu Qnivq gur xvat unq znqr gb
cenvfr gur YBEQ, orpnhfr uvf zrepl raqhergu sbe rire, jura Qnivq
cenvfrq ol gurve zvavfgel; naq gur cevrfgf fbhaqrq gehzcrgf orsber
gurz, naq nyy Vfenry fgbbq.

7:7 Zberbire Fbybzba unyybjrq gur zvqqyr bs gur pbheg gung jnf orsber
gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ: sbe gurer ur bssrerq oheag bssrevatf, naq gur
sng bs gur crnpr bssrevatf, orpnhfr gur oenfra nygne juvpu Fbybzba unq
znqr jnf abg noyr gb erprvir gur oheag bssrevatf, naq gur zrng
bssrevatf, naq gur sng.

7:8 Nyfb ng gur fnzr gvzr Fbybzba xrcg gur srnfg frira qnlf, naq nyy
Vfenry jvgu uvz, n irel terng pbatertngvba, sebz gur ragrevat va bs
Unzngu hagb gur evire bs Rtlcg.

7:9 Naq va gur rvtugu qnl gurl znqr n fbyrza nffrzoyl: sbe gurl xrcg
gur qrqvpngvba bs gur nygne frira qnlf, naq gur srnfg frira qnlf.

7:10 Naq ba gur guerr naq gjragvrgu qnl bs gur friragu zbagu ur frag
gur crbcyr njnl vagb gurve gragf, tynq naq zreel va urneg sbe gur
tbbqarff gung gur YBEQ unq furjrq hagb Qnivq, naq gb Fbybzba, naq gb
Vfenry uvf crbcyr.

7:11 Guhf Fbybzba svavfurq gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq gur xvat'f
ubhfr: naq nyy gung pnzr vagb Fbybzba'f urneg gb znxr va gur ubhfr bs
gur YBEQ, naq va uvf bja ubhfr, ur cebfcrebhfyl rssrpgrq.

7:12 Naq gur YBEQ nccrnerq gb Fbybzba ol avtug, naq fnvq hagb uvz, V
unir urneq gul cenlre, naq unir pubfra guvf cynpr gb zlfrys sbe na
ubhfr bs fnpevsvpr.

7:13 Vs V fuhg hc urnira gung gurer or ab enva, be vs V pbzznaq gur
ybphfgf gb qribhe gur ynaq, be vs V fraq crfgvyrapr nzbat zl crbcyr;
7:14 Vs zl crbcyr, juvpu ner pnyyrq ol zl anzr, funyy uhzoyr
gurzfryirf, naq cenl, naq frrx zl snpr, naq ghea sebz gurve jvpxrq
jnlf; gura jvyy V urne sebz urnira, naq jvyy sbetvir gurve fva, naq
jvyy urny gurve ynaq.

7:15 Abj zvar rlrf funyy or bcra, naq zvar rnef nggrag hagb gur cenlre
gung vf znqr va guvf cynpr.

7:16 Sbe abj unir V pubfra naq fnapgvsvrq guvf ubhfr, gung zl anzr znl
or gurer sbe rire: naq zvar rlrf naq zvar urneg funyy or gurer
crecrghnyyl.

7:17 Naq nf sbe gurr, vs gubh jvyg jnyx orsber zr, nf Qnivq gul sngure
jnyxrq, naq qb nppbeqvat gb nyy gung V unir pbzznaqrq gurr, naq funyg
bofreir zl fgnghgrf naq zl whqtzragf; 7:18 Gura jvyy V fgnoyvfu gur
guebar bs gul xvatqbz, nppbeqvat nf V unir pbiranagrq jvgu Qnivq gul
sngure, fnlvat, Gurer funyy abg snvy gurr n zna gb or ehyre va Vfenry.

7:19 Ohg vs lr ghea njnl, naq sbefnxr zl fgnghgrf naq zl pbzznaqzragf,
juvpu V unir frg orsber lbh, naq funyy tb naq freir bgure tbqf, naq
jbefuvc gurz; 7:20 Gura jvyy V cyhpx gurz hc ol gur ebbgf bhg bs zl
ynaq juvpu V unir tvira gurz; naq guvf ubhfr, juvpu V unir fnapgvsvrq
sbe zl anzr, jvyy V pnfg bhg bs zl fvtug, naq jvyy znxr vg gb or n
cebireo naq n oljbeq nzbat nyy angvbaf.

7:21 Naq guvf ubhfr, juvpu vf uvtu, funyy or na nfgbavfuzrag gb rirel
bar gung cnffrgu ol vg; fb gung ur funyy fnl, Jul ungu gur YBEQ qbar
guhf hagb guvf ynaq, naq hagb guvf ubhfr?  7:22 Naq vg funyy or
nafjrerq, Orpnhfr gurl sbefbbx gur YBEQ Tbq bs gurve snguref, juvpu
oebhtug gurz sbegu bhg bs gur ynaq bs Rtlcg, naq ynvq ubyq ba bgure
tbqf, naq jbefuvccrq gurz, naq freirq gurz: gurersber ungu ur oebhtug
nyy guvf rivy hcba gurz.

8:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng gur raq bs gjragl lrnef, jurerva Fbybzba
unq ohvyg gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq uvf bja ubhfr, 8:2 Gung gur
pvgvrf juvpu Uhenz unq erfgberq gb Fbybzba, Fbybzba ohvyg gurz, naq
pnhfrq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry gb qjryy gurer.

8:3 Naq Fbybzba jrag gb Unzngumbonu, naq cerinvyrq ntnvafg vg.

8:4 Naq ur ohvyg Gnqzbe va gur jvyqrearff, naq nyy gur fgber pvgvrf,
juvpu ur ohvyg va Unzngu.

8:5 Nyfb ur ohvyg Orguubeba gur hccre, naq Orguubeba gur argure,
sraprq pvgvrf, jvgu jnyyf, tngrf, naq onef; 8:6 Naq Onnyngu, naq nyy
gur fgber pvgvrf gung Fbybzba unq, naq nyy gur punevbg pvgvrf, naq gur
pvgvrf bs gur ubefrzra, naq nyy gung Fbybzba qrfverq gb ohvyq va
Wrehfnyrz, naq va Yronaba, naq guebhtubhg nyy gur ynaq bs uvf
qbzvavba.

8:7 Nf sbe nyy gur crbcyr gung jrer yrsg bs gur Uvggvgrf, naq gur
Nzbevgrf, naq gur Crevmmvgrf, naq gur Uvivgrf, naq gur Wrohfvgrf,
juvpu jrer abg bs Vfenry, 8:8 Ohg bs gurve puvyqera, jub jrer yrsg
nsgre gurz va gur ynaq, jubz gur puvyqera bs Vfenry pbafhzrq abg, gurz
qvq Fbybzba znxr gb cnl gevohgr hagvy guvf qnl.

8:9 Ohg bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry qvq Fbybzba znxr ab freinagf sbe uvf
jbex; ohg gurl jrer zra bs jne, naq puvrs bs uvf pncgnvaf, naq
pncgnvaf bs uvf punevbgf naq ubefrzra.

8:10 Naq gurfr jrer gur puvrs bs xvat Fbybzba'f bssvpref, rira gjb
uhaqerq naq svsgl, gung oner ehyr bire gur crbcyr.

8:11 Naq Fbybzba oebhtug hc gur qnhtugre bs Cunenbu bhg bs gur pvgl bs
Qnivq hagb gur ubhfr gung ur unq ohvyg sbe ure: sbe ur fnvq, Zl jvsr
funyy abg qjryy va gur ubhfr bs Qnivq xvat bs Vfenry, orpnhfr gur
cynprf ner ubyl, jurerhagb gur nex bs gur YBEQ ungu pbzr.

8:12 Gura Fbybzba bssrerq oheag bssrevatf hagb gur YBEQ ba gur nygne
bs gur YBEQ, juvpu ur unq ohvyg orsber gur cbepu, 8:13 Rira nsgre n
pregnva engr rirel qnl, bssrevat nppbeqvat gb gur pbzznaqzrag bs
Zbfrf, ba gur fnoonguf, naq ba gur arj zbbaf, naq ba gur fbyrza
srnfgf, guerr gvzrf va gur lrne, rira va gur srnfg bs hayrnirarq
oernq, naq va gur srnfg bs jrrxf, naq va gur srnfg bs gnoreanpyrf.

8:14 Naq ur nccbvagrq, nppbeqvat gb gur beqre bs Qnivq uvf sngure, gur
pbhefrf bs gur cevrfgf gb gurve freivpr, naq gur Yrivgrf gb gurve
punetrf, gb cenvfr naq zvavfgre orsber gur cevrfgf, nf gur qhgl bs
rirel qnl erdhverq: gur cbegref nyfb ol gurve pbhefrf ng rirel tngr:
sbe fb unq Qnivq gur zna bs Tbq pbzznaqrq.

8:15 Naq gurl qrcnegrq abg sebz gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur xvat hagb gur
cevrfgf naq Yrivgrf pbapreavat nal znggre, be pbapreavat gur
gernfherf.

8:16 Abj nyy gur jbex bs Fbybzba jnf cercnerq hagb gur qnl bs gur
sbhaqngvba bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq hagvy vg jnf svavfurq. Fb gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ jnf cresrpgrq.

8:17 Gura jrag Fbybzba gb Rmvbatrore, naq gb Rybgu, ng gur frn fvqr va
gur ynaq bs Rqbz.

8:18 Naq Uhenz frag uvz ol gur unaqf bs uvf freinagf fuvcf, naq
freinagf gung unq xabjyrqtr bs gur frn; naq gurl jrag jvgu gur
freinagf bs Fbybzba gb Bcuve, naq gbbx gurapr sbhe uhaqerq naq svsgl
gnyragf bs tbyq, naq oebhtug gurz gb xvat Fbybzba.

9:1 Naq jura gur dhrra bs Furon urneq bs gur snzr bs Fbybzba, fur pnzr
gb cebir Fbybzba jvgu uneq dhrfgvbaf ng Wrehfnyrz, jvgu n irel terng
pbzcnal, naq pnzryf gung oner fcvprf, naq tbyq va nohaqnapr, naq
cerpvbhf fgbarf: naq jura fur jnf pbzr gb Fbybzba, fur pbzzharq jvgu
uvz bs nyy gung jnf va ure urneg.

9:2 Naq Fbybzba gbyq ure nyy ure dhrfgvbaf: naq gurer jnf abguvat uvq
sebz Fbybzba juvpu ur gbyq ure abg.

9:3 Naq jura gur dhrra bs Furon unq frra gur jvfqbz bs Fbybzba, naq
gur ubhfr gung ur unq ohvyg, 9:4 Naq gur zrng bs uvf gnoyr, naq gur
fvggvat bs uvf freinagf, naq gur nggraqnapr bs uvf zvavfgref, naq
gurve nccnery; uvf phcorneref nyfb, naq gurve nccnery; naq uvf nfprag
ol juvpu ur jrag hc vagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ; gurer jnf ab zber
fcvevg va ure.

9:5 Naq fur fnvq gb gur xvat, Vg jnf n gehr ercbeg juvpu V urneq va
zvar bja ynaq bs guvar npgf, naq bs gul jvfqbz: 9:6 Ubjorvg V oryvrirq
abg gurve jbeqf, hagvy V pnzr, naq zvar rlrf unq frra vg: naq, orubyq,
gur bar unys bs gur terngarff bs gul jvfqbz jnf abg gbyq zr: sbe gubh
rkprrqrfg gur snzr gung V urneq.

9:7 Unccl ner gul zra, naq unccl ner gurfr gul freinagf, juvpu fgnaq
pbagvahnyyl orsber gurr, naq urne gul jvfqbz.

9:8 Oyrffrq or gur YBEQ gul Tbq, juvpu qryvtugrq va gurr gb frg gurr
ba uvf guebar, gb or xvat sbe gur YBEQ gul Tbq: orpnhfr gul Tbq ybirq
Vfenry, gb rfgnoyvfu gurz sbe rire, gurersber znqr ur gurr xvat bire
gurz, gb qb whqtzrag naq whfgvpr.

9:9 Naq fur tnir gur xvat na uhaqerq naq gjragl gnyragf bs tbyq, naq
bs fcvprf terng nohaqnapr, naq cerpvbhf fgbarf: arvgure jnf gurer nal
fhpu fcvpr nf gur dhrra bs Furon tnir xvat Fbybzba.

9:10 Naq gur freinagf nyfb bs Uhenz, naq gur freinagf bs Fbybzba,
juvpu oebhtug tbyq sebz Bcuve, oebhtug nythz gerrf naq cerpvbhf
fgbarf.

9:11 Naq gur xvat znqr bs gur nythz gerrf greenprf gb gur ubhfr bs gur
YBEQ, naq gb gur xvat'f cnynpr, naq unecf naq cfnygrevrf sbe fvatref:
naq gurer jrer abar fhpu frra orsber va gur ynaq bs Whqnu.

9:12 Naq xvat Fbybzba tnir gb gur dhrra bs Furon nyy ure qrfver,
jungfbrire fur nfxrq, orfvqr gung juvpu fur unq oebhtug hagb gur xvat.
Fb fur ghearq, naq jrag njnl gb ure bja ynaq, fur naq ure freinagf.

9:13 Abj gur jrvtug bs tbyq gung pnzr gb Fbybzba va bar lrne jnf fvk
uhaqerq naq guerrfpber naq fvk gnyragf bs tbyq; 9:14 Orfvqr gung juvpu
punczra naq zrepunagf oebhtug. Naq nyy gur xvatf bs Nenovn naq
tbireabef bs gur pbhagel oebhtug tbyq naq fvyire gb Fbybzba.

9:15 Naq xvat Fbybzba znqr gjb uhaqerq gnetrgf bs orngra tbyq: fvk
uhaqerq furxryf bs orngra tbyq jrag gb bar gnetrg.

9:16 Naq guerr uhaqerq fuvryqf znqr ur bs orngra tbyq: guerr uhaqerq
furxryf bs tbyq jrag gb bar fuvryq. Naq gur xvat chg gurz va gur ubhfr
bs gur sberfg bs Yronaba.

9:17 Zberbire gur xvat znqr n terng guebar bs vibel, naq bireynvq vg
jvgu cher tbyq.

9:18 Naq gurer jrer fvk fgrcf gb gur guebar, jvgu n sbbgfgbby bs tbyq,
juvpu jrer snfgrarq gb gur guebar, naq fgnlf ba rnpu fvqr bs gur
fvggvat cynpr, naq gjb yvbaf fgnaqvat ol gur fgnlf: 9:19 Naq gjryir
yvbaf fgbbq gurer ba gur bar fvqr naq ba gur bgure hcba gur fvk fgrcf.
Gurer jnf abg gur yvxr znqr va nal xvatqbz.

9:20 Naq nyy gur qevaxvat irffryf bs xvat Fbybzba jrer bs tbyq, naq
nyy gur irffryf bs gur ubhfr bs gur sberfg bs Yronaba jrer bs cher
tbyq: abar jrer bs fvyire; vg jnf abg nal guvat nppbhagrq bs va gur
qnlf bs Fbybzba.

9:21 Sbe gur xvat'f fuvcf jrag gb Gnefuvfu jvgu gur freinagf bs Uhenz:
rirel guerr lrnef bapr pnzr gur fuvcf bs Gnefuvfu oevatvat tbyq, naq
fvyire, vibel, naq ncrf, naq crnpbpxf.

9:22 Naq xvat Fbybzba cnffrq nyy gur xvatf bs gur rnegu va evpurf naq
jvfqbz.

9:23 Naq nyy gur xvatf bs gur rnegu fbhtug gur cerfrapr bs Fbybzba, gb
urne uvf jvfqbz, gung Tbq unq chg va uvf urneg.

9:24 Naq gurl oebhtug rirel zna uvf cerfrag, irffryf bs fvyire, naq
irffryf bs tbyq, naq envzrag, unearff, naq fcvprf, ubefrf, naq zhyrf,
n engr lrne ol lrne.

9:25 Naq Fbybzba unq sbhe gubhfnaq fgnyyf sbe ubefrf naq punevbgf, naq
gjryir gubhfnaq ubefrzra; jubz ur orfgbjrq va gur punevbg pvgvrf, naq
jvgu gur xvat ng Wrehfnyrz.

9:26 Naq ur ervtarq bire nyy gur xvatf sebz gur evire rira hagb gur
ynaq bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf, naq gb gur obeqre bs Rtlcg.

9:27 Naq gur xvat znqr fvyire va Wrehfnyrz nf fgbarf, naq prqne gerrf
znqr ur nf gur flpbzber gerrf gung ner va gur ybj cynvaf va nohaqnapr.

9:28 Naq gurl oebhtug hagb Fbybzba ubefrf bhg bs Rtlcg, naq bhg bs nyy
ynaqf.

9:29 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Fbybzba, svefg naq ynfg, ner gurl abg
jevggra va gur obbx bs Anguna gur cebcurg, naq va gur cebcurpl bs
Nuvwnu gur Fuvybavgr, naq va gur ivfvbaf bs Vqqb gur frre ntnvafg
Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong?  9:30 Naq Fbybzba ervtarq va Wrehfnyrz bire
nyy Vfenry sbegl lrnef.

9:31 Naq Fbybzba fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq ur jnf ohevrq va gur pvgl
bs Qnivq uvf sngure: naq Erubobnz uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

10:1 Naq Erubobnz jrag gb Furpurz: sbe gb Furpurz jrer nyy Vfenry pbzr
gb znxr uvz xvat.

10:2 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong, jub jnf va
Rtlcg, juvgure ur syrq sebz gur cerfrapr bs Fbybzba gur xvat, urneq
vg, gung Wrebobnz erghearq bhg bs Rtlcg.

10:3 Naq gurl frag naq pnyyrq uvz. Fb Wrebobnz naq nyy Vfenry pnzr naq
fcnxr gb Erubobnz, fnlvat, 10:4 Gul sngure znqr bhe lbxr tevribhf: abj
gurersber rnfr gubh fbzrjung gur tevribhf freivghqr bs gul sngure, naq
uvf urnil lbxr gung ur chg hcba hf, naq jr jvyy freir gurr.

10:5 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Pbzr ntnva hagb zr nsgre guerr qnlf. Naq
gur crbcyr qrcnegrq.

10:6 Naq xvat Erubobnz gbbx pbhafry jvgu gur byq zra gung unq fgbbq
orsber Fbybzba uvf sngure juvyr ur lrg yvirq, fnlvat, Jung pbhafry
tvir lr zr gb erghea nafjre gb guvf crbcyr?  10:7 Naq gurl fcnxr hagb
uvz, fnlvat, Vs gubh or xvaq gb guvf crbcyr, naq cyrnfr gurz, naq
fcrnx tbbq jbeqf gb gurz, gurl jvyy or gul freinagf sbe rire.

10:8 Ohg ur sbefbbx gur pbhafry juvpu gur byq zra tnir uvz, naq gbbx
pbhafry jvgu gur lbhat zra gung jrer oebhtug hc jvgu uvz, gung fgbbq
orsber uvz.

10:9 Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Jung nqivpr tvir lr gung jr znl erghea
nafjre gb guvf crbcyr, juvpu unir fcbxra gb zr, fnlvat, Rnfr fbzrjung
gur lbxr gung gul sngure qvq chg hcba hf?  10:10 Naq gur lbhat zra
gung jrer oebhtug hc jvgu uvz fcnxr hagb uvz, fnlvat, Guhf funyg gubh
nafjre gur crbcyr gung fcnxr hagb gurr, fnlvat, Gul sngure znqr bhe
lbxr urnil, ohg znxr gubh vg fbzrjung yvtugre sbe hf; guhf funyg gubh
fnl hagb gurz, Zl yvggyr svatre funyy or guvpxre guna zl sngure'f
ybvaf.

10:11 Sbe jurernf zl sngure chg n urnil lbxr hcba lbh, V jvyy chg zber
gb lbhe lbxr: zl sngure punfgvfrq lbh jvgu juvcf, ohg V jvyy punfgvfr
lbh jvgu fpbecvbaf.

10:12 Fb Wrebobnz naq nyy gur crbcyr pnzr gb Erubobnz ba gur guveq
qnl, nf gur xvat onqr, fnlvat, Pbzr ntnva gb zr ba gur guveq qnl.

10:13 Naq gur xvat nafjrerq gurz ebhtuyl; naq xvat Erubobnz sbefbbx
gur pbhafry bs gur byq zra, 10:14 Naq nafjrerq gurz nsgre gur nqivpr
bs gur lbhat zra, fnlvat, Zl sngure znqr lbhe lbxr urnil, ohg V jvyy
nqq gurergb: zl sngure punfgvfrq lbh jvgu juvcf, ohg V jvyy punfgvfr
lbh jvgu fpbecvbaf.

10:15 Fb gur xvat urnexrarq abg hagb gur crbcyr: sbe gur pnhfr jnf bs
Tbq, gung gur YBEQ zvtug cresbez uvf jbeq, juvpu ur fcnxr ol gur unaq
bs Nuvwnu gur Fuvybavgr gb Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong.

10:16 Naq jura nyy Vfenry fnj gung gur xvat jbhyq abg urnexra hagb
gurz, gur crbcyr nafjrerq gur xvat, fnlvat, Jung cbegvba unir jr va
Qnivq?  naq jr unir abar vaurevgnapr va gur fba bs Wrffr: rirel zna gb
lbhe gragf, B Vfenry: naq abj, Qnivq, frr gb guvar bja ubhfr. Fb nyy
Vfenry jrag gb gurve gragf.

10:17 Ohg nf sbe gur puvyqera bs Vfenry gung qjryg va gur pvgvrf bs
Whqnu, Erubobnz ervtarq bire gurz.

10:18 Gura xvat Erubobnz frag Unqbenz gung jnf bire gur gevohgr; naq
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry fgbarq uvz jvgu fgbarf, gung ur qvrq. Ohg xvat
Erubobnz znqr fcrrq gb trg uvz hc gb uvf punevbg, gb syrr gb
Wrehfnyrz.

10:19 Naq Vfenry eroryyrq ntnvafg gur ubhfr bs Qnivq hagb guvf qnl.

11:1 Naq jura Erubobnz jnf pbzr gb Wrehfnyrz, ur tngurerq bs gur ubhfr
bs Whqnu naq Orawnzva na uhaqerq naq sbhefpber gubhfnaq pubfra zra,
juvpu jrer jneevbef, gb svtug ntnvafg Vfenry, gung ur zvtug oevat gur
xvatqbz ntnva gb Erubobnz.

11:2 Ohg gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ pnzr gb Furznvnu gur zna bs Tbq, fnlvat,
11:3 Fcrnx hagb Erubobnz gur fba bs Fbybzba, xvat bs Whqnu, naq gb nyy
Vfenry va Whqnu naq Orawnzva, fnlvat, 11:4 Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Lr
funyy abg tb hc, abe svtug ntnvafg lbhe oerguera: erghea rirel zna gb
uvf ubhfr: sbe guvf guvat vf qbar bs zr. Naq gurl borlrq gur jbeqf bs
gur YBEQ, naq erghearq sebz tbvat ntnvafg Wrebobnz.

11:5 Naq Erubobnz qjryg va Wrehfnyrz, naq ohvyg pvgvrf sbe qrsrapr va
Whqnu.

11:6 Ur ohvyg rira Orguyrurz, naq Rgnz, naq Grxbn, 11:7 Naq Orgumhe,
naq Fubpb, naq Nqhyynz, 11:8 Naq Tngu, naq Znerfunu, naq Mvcu, 11:9
Naq Nqbenvz, naq Ynpuvfu, naq Nmrxnu, 11:10 Naq Mbenu, naq Nvwnyba,
naq Uroeba, juvpu ner va Whqnu naq va Orawnzva sraprq pvgvrf.

11:11 Naq ur sbegvsvrq gur fgebat ubyqf, naq chg pncgnvaf va gurz, naq
fgber bs ivpghny, naq bs bvy naq jvar.

11:12 Naq va rirel frireny pvgl ur chg fuvryqf naq fcrnef, naq znqr
gurz rkprrqvat fgebat, univat Whqnu naq Orawnzva ba uvf fvqr.

11:13 Naq gur cevrfgf naq gur Yrivgrf gung jrer va nyy Vfenry erfbegrq
gb uvz bhg bs nyy gurve pbnfgf.

11:14 Sbe gur Yrivgrf yrsg gurve fhoheof naq gurve cbffrffvba, naq
pnzr gb Whqnu naq Wrehfnyrz: sbe Wrebobnz naq uvf fbaf unq pnfg gurz
bss sebz rkrphgvat gur cevrfg'f bssvpr hagb gur YBEQ: 11:15 Naq ur
beqnvarq uvz cevrfgf sbe gur uvtu cynprf, naq sbe gur qrivyf, naq sbe
gur pnyirf juvpu ur unq znqr.

11:16 Naq nsgre gurz bhg bs nyy gur gevorf bs Vfenry fhpu nf frg gurve
urnegf gb frrx gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry pnzr gb Wrehfnyrz, gb fnpevsvpr
hagb gur YBEQ Tbq bs gurve snguref.

11:17 Fb gurl fgeratgurarq gur xvatqbz bs Whqnu, naq znqr Erubobnz gur
fba bs Fbybzba fgebat, guerr lrnef: sbe guerr lrnef gurl jnyxrq va gur
jnl bs Qnivq naq Fbybzba.

11:18 Naq Erubobnz gbbx uvz Znunyngu gur qnhtugre bs Wrevzbgu gur fba
bs Qnivq gb jvsr, naq Novunvy gur qnhtugre bs Ryvno gur fba bs Wrffr;
11:19 Juvpu oner uvz puvyqera; Wrhfu, naq Funznevnu, naq Mnunz.

11:20 Naq nsgre ure ur gbbx Znnpunu gur qnhtugre bs Nofnybz; juvpu
oner uvz Novwnu, naq Nggnv, naq Mvmn, naq Furybzvgu.

11:21 Naq Erubobnz ybirq Znnpunu gur qnhtugre bs Nofnybz nobir nyy uvf
jvirf naq uvf pbaphovarf: (sbe ur gbbx rvtugrra jvirf, naq guerrfpber
pbaphovarf; naq ortng gjragl naq rvtug fbaf, naq guerrfpber
qnhtugref.)  11:22 Naq Erubobnz znqr Novwnu gur fba bs Znnpunu gur
puvrs, gb or ehyre nzbat uvf oerguera: sbe ur gubhtug gb znxr uvz
xvat.

11:23 Naq ur qrnyg jvfryl, naq qvfcrefrq bs nyy uvf puvyqera
guebhtubhg nyy gur pbhagevrf bs Whqnu naq Orawnzva, hagb rirel sraprq
pvgl: naq ur tnir gurz ivpghny va nohaqnapr. Naq ur qrfverq znal
jvirf.

12:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Erubobnz unq rfgnoyvfurq gur xvatqbz,
naq unq fgeratgurarq uvzfrys, ur sbefbbx gur ynj bs gur YBEQ, naq nyy
Vfenry jvgu uvz.

12:2 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung va gur svsgu lrne bs xvat Erubobnz
Fuvfunx xvat bs Rtlcg pnzr hc ntnvafg Wrehfnyrz, orpnhfr gurl unq
genafterffrq ntnvafg gur YBEQ, 12:3 Jvgu gjryir uhaqerq punevbgf, naq
guerrfpber gubhfnaq ubefrzra: naq gur crbcyr jrer jvgubhg ahzore gung
pnzr jvgu uvz bhg bs Rtlcg; gur Yhovzf, gur Fhxxvvzf, naq gur
Rguvbcvnaf.

12:4 Naq ur gbbx gur sraprq pvgvrf juvpu cregnvarq gb Whqnu, naq pnzr
gb Wrehfnyrz.

12:5 Gura pnzr Furznvnu gur cebcurg gb Erubobnz, naq gb gur cevaprf bs
Whqnu, gung jrer tngurerq gbtrgure gb Wrehfnyrz orpnhfr bs Fuvfunx,
naq fnvq hagb gurz, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Lr unir sbefnxra zr, naq
gurersber unir V nyfb yrsg lbh va gur unaq bs Fuvfunx.

12:6 Jurerhcba gur cevaprf bs Vfenry naq gur xvat uhzoyrq gurzfryirf;
naq gurl fnvq, Gur YBEQ vf evtugrbhf.

12:7 Naq jura gur YBEQ fnj gung gurl uhzoyrq gurzfryirf, gur jbeq bs
gur YBEQ pnzr gb Furznvnu, fnlvat, Gurl unir uhzoyrq gurzfryirf;
gurersber V jvyy abg qrfgebl gurz, ohg V jvyy tenag gurz fbzr
qryvirenapr; naq zl jengu funyy abg or cbherq bhg hcba Wrehfnyrz ol
gur unaq bs Fuvfunx.

12:8 Arireguryrff gurl funyy or uvf freinagf; gung gurl znl xabj zl
freivpr, naq gur freivpr bs gur xvatqbzf bs gur pbhagevrf.

12:9 Fb Fuvfunx xvat bs Rtlcg pnzr hc ntnvafg Wrehfnyrz, naq gbbx njnl
gur gernfherf bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq gur gernfherf bs gur
xvat'f ubhfr; ur gbbx nyy: ur pneevrq njnl nyfb gur fuvryqf bs tbyq
juvpu Fbybzba unq znqr.

12:10 Vafgrnq bs juvpu xvat Erubobnz znqr fuvryqf bs oenff, naq
pbzzvggrq gurz gb gur unaqf bs gur puvrs bs gur thneq, gung xrcg gur
ragenapr bs gur xvat'f ubhfr.

12:11 Naq jura gur xvat ragrerq vagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, gur thneq
pnzr naq srgpurq gurz, naq oebhtug gurz ntnva vagb gur thneq punzore.

12:12 Naq jura ur uhzoyrq uvzfrys, gur jengu bs gur YBEQ ghearq sebz
uvz, gung ur jbhyq abg qrfgebl uvz nygbtrgure: naq nyfb va Whqnu
guvatf jrag jryy.

12:13 Fb xvat Erubobnz fgeratgurarq uvzfrys va Wrehfnyrz, naq ervtarq:
sbe Erubobnz jnf bar naq sbegl lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq
ur ervtarq friragrra lrnef va Wrehfnyrz, gur pvgl juvpu gur YBEQ unq
pubfra bhg bs nyy gur gevorf bs Vfenry, gb chg uvf anzr gurer. Naq uvf
zbgure'f anzr jnf Annznu na Nzzbavgrff.

12:14 Naq ur qvq rivy, orpnhfr ur cercnerq abg uvf urneg gb frrx gur
YBEQ.

12:15 Abj gur npgf bs Erubobnz, svefg naq ynfg, ner gurl abg jevggra
va gur obbx bs Furznvnu gur cebcurg, naq bs Vqqb gur frre pbapreavat
trarnybtvrf? Naq gurer jrer jnef orgjrra Erubobnz naq Wrebobnz
pbagvahnyyl.

12:16 Naq Erubobnz fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq jnf ohevrq va gur pvgl
bs Qnivq: naq Novwnu uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

13:1 Abj va gur rvtugrragu lrne bs xvat Wrebobnz ortna Novwnu gb ervta
bire Whqnu.

13:2 Ur ervtarq guerr lrnef va Wrehfnyrz. Uvf zbgure'f anzr nyfb jnf
Zvpunvnu gur qnhtugre bs Hevry bs Tvornu. Naq gurer jnf jne orgjrra
Novwnu naq Wrebobnz.

13:3 Naq Novwnu frg gur onggyr va neenl jvgu na nezl bs inyvnag zra bs
jne, rira sbhe uhaqerq gubhfnaq pubfra zra: Wrebobnz nyfb frg gur
onggyr va neenl ntnvafg uvz jvgu rvtug uhaqerq gubhfnaq pubfra zra,
orvat zvtugl zra bs inybhe.

13:4 Naq Novwnu fgbbq hc hcba zbhag Mrznenvz, juvpu vf va zbhag
Rcuenvz, naq fnvq, Urne zr, gubh Wrebobnz, naq nyy Vfenry; 13:5 Bhtug
lr abg gb xabj gung gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry tnir gur xvatqbz bire
Vfenry gb Qnivq sbe rire, rira gb uvz naq gb uvf fbaf ol n pbiranag bs
fnyg?  13:6 Lrg Wrebobnz gur fba bs Arong, gur freinag bs Fbybzba gur
fba bs Qnivq, vf evfra hc, naq ungu eroryyrq ntnvafg uvf ybeq.

13:7 Naq gurer ner tngurerq hagb uvz inva zra, gur puvyqera bs Oryvny,
naq unir fgeratgurarq gurzfryirf ntnvafg Erubobnz gur fba bs Fbybzba,
jura Erubobnz jnf lbhat naq graqreurnegrq, naq pbhyq abg jvgufgnaq
gurz.

13:8 Naq abj lr guvax gb jvgufgnaq gur xvatqbz bs gur YBEQ va gur unaq
bs gur fbaf bs Qnivq; naq lr or n terng zhygvghqr, naq gurer ner jvgu
lbhe tbyqra pnyirf, juvpu Wrebobnz znqr lbh sbe tbqf.

13:9 Unir lr abg pnfg bhg gur cevrfgf bs gur YBEQ, gur fbaf bs Nneba,
naq gur Yrivgrf, naq unir znqr lbh cevrfgf nsgre gur znaare bs gur
angvbaf bs bgure ynaqf? fb gung jubfbrire pbzrgu gb pbafrpengr uvzfrys
jvgu n lbhat ohyybpx naq frira enzf, gur fnzr znl or n cevrfg bs gurz
gung ner ab tbqf.

13:10 Ohg nf sbe hf, gur YBEQ vf bhe Tbq, naq jr unir abg sbefnxra
uvz; naq gur cevrfgf, juvpu zvavfgre hagb gur YBEQ, ner gur fbaf bs
Nneba, naq gur Yrivgrf jnvg hcba gurve ohfvarff: 13:11 Naq gurl ohea
hagb gur YBEQ rirel zbeavat naq rirel riravat oheag fnpevsvprf naq
fjrrg vaprafr: gur furjoernq nyfb frg gurl va beqre hcba gur cher
gnoyr; naq gur pnaqyrfgvpx bs tbyq jvgu gur ynzcf gurerbs, gb ohea
rirel riravat: sbe jr xrrc gur punetr bs gur YBEQ bhe Tbq; ohg lr unir
sbefnxra uvz.

13:12 Naq, orubyq, Tbq uvzfrys vf jvgu hf sbe bhe pncgnva, naq uvf
cevrfgf jvgu fbhaqvat gehzcrgf gb pel nynez ntnvafg lbh. B puvyqera bs
Vfenry, svtug lr abg ntnvafg gur YBEQ Tbq bs lbhe snguref; sbe lr
funyy abg cebfcre.

13:13 Ohg Wrebobnz pnhfrq na nzohfuzrag gb pbzr nobhg oruvaq gurz: fb
gurl jrer orsber Whqnu, naq gur nzohfuzrag jnf oruvaq gurz.

13:14 Naq jura Whqnu ybbxrq onpx, orubyq, gur onggyr jnf orsber naq
oruvaq: naq gurl pevrq hagb gur YBEQ, naq gur cevrfgf fbhaqrq jvgu gur
gehzcrgf.

13:15 Gura gur zra bs Whqnu tnir n fubhg: naq nf gur zra bs Whqnu
fubhgrq, vg pnzr gb cnff, gung Tbq fzbgr Wrebobnz naq nyy Vfenry
orsber Novwnu naq Whqnu.

13:16 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry syrq orsber Whqnu: naq Tbq qryvirerq
gurz vagb gurve unaq.

13:17 Naq Novwnu naq uvf crbcyr fyrj gurz jvgu n terng fynhtugre: fb
gurer sryy qbja fynva bs Vfenry svir uhaqerq gubhfnaq pubfra zra.

13:18 Guhf gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jrer oebhtug haqre ng gung gvzr, naq
gur puvyqera bs Whqnu cerinvyrq, orpnhfr gurl eryvrq hcba gur YBEQ Tbq
bs gurve snguref.

13:19 Naq Novwnu chefhrq nsgre Wrebobnz, naq gbbx pvgvrf sebz uvz,
Orgury jvgu gur gbjaf gurerbs, naq Wrfunanu jvgu gur gbjaf gurerbs,
naq Rcuenvz jvgu gur gbjaf gurerbs.

13:20 Arvgure qvq Wrebobnz erpbire fgeratgu ntnva va gur qnlf bs
Novwnu: naq gur YBEQ fgehpx uvz, naq ur qvrq.

13:21 Ohg Novwnu jnkrq zvtugl, naq zneevrq sbhegrra jvirf, naq ortng
gjragl naq gjb fbaf, naq fvkgrra qnhtugref.

13:22 Naq gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Novwnu, naq uvf jnlf, naq uvf
fnlvatf, ner jevggra va gur fgbel bs gur cebcurg Vqqb.

14:1 Fb Novwnu fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq gurl ohevrq uvz va gur pvgl
bs Qnivq: naq Nfn uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq. Va uvf qnlf gur ynaq
jnf dhvrg gra lrnef.

14:2 Naq Nfn qvq gung juvpu jnf tbbq naq evtug va gur rlrf bs gur YBEQ
uvf Tbq: 14:3 Sbe ur gbbx njnl gur nygnef bs gur fgenatr tbqf, naq gur
uvtu cynprf, naq oenxr qbja gur vzntrf, naq phg qbja gur tebirf: 14:4
Naq pbzznaqrq Whqnu gb frrx gur YBEQ Tbq bs gurve snguref, naq gb qb
gur ynj naq gur pbzznaqzrag.

14:5 Nyfb ur gbbx njnl bhg bs nyy gur pvgvrf bs Whqnu gur uvtu cynprf
naq gur vzntrf: naq gur xvatqbz jnf dhvrg orsber uvz.

14:6 Naq ur ohvyg sraprq pvgvrf va Whqnu: sbe gur ynaq unq erfg, naq
ur unq ab jne va gubfr lrnef; orpnhfr gur YBEQ unq tvira uvz erfg.

14:7 Gurersber ur fnvq hagb Whqnu, Yrg hf ohvyq gurfr pvgvrf, naq znxr
nobhg gurz jnyyf, naq gbjref, tngrf, naq onef, juvyr gur ynaq vf lrg
orsber hf; orpnhfr jr unir fbhtug gur YBEQ bhe Tbq, jr unir fbhtug
uvz, naq ur ungu tvira hf erfg ba rirel fvqr. Fb gurl ohvyg naq
cebfcrerq.

14:8 Naq Nfn unq na nezl bs zra gung oner gnetrgf naq fcrnef, bhg bs
Whqnu guerr uhaqerq gubhfnaq; naq bhg bs Orawnzva, gung oner fuvryqf
naq qerj objf, gjb uhaqerq naq sbhefpber gubhfnaq: nyy gurfr jrer
zvtugl zra bs inybhe.

14:9 Naq gurer pnzr bhg ntnvafg gurz Mrenu gur Rguvbcvna jvgu na ubfg
bs n gubhfnaq gubhfnaq, naq guerr uhaqerq punevbgf; naq pnzr hagb
Znerfunu.

14:10 Gura Nfn jrag bhg ntnvafg uvz, naq gurl frg gur onggyr va neenl
va gur inyyrl bs Mrcungunu ng Znerfunu.

14:11 Naq Nfn pevrq hagb gur YBEQ uvf Tbq, naq fnvq, YBEQ, vg vf
abguvat jvgu gurr gb uryc, jurgure jvgu znal, be jvgu gurz gung unir
ab cbjre: uryc hf, B YBEQ bhe Tbq; sbe jr erfg ba gurr, naq va gul
anzr jr tb ntnvafg guvf zhygvghqr. B YBEQ, gubh neg bhe Tbq; yrg ab
zna cerinvy ntnvafg gurr.

14:12 Fb gur YBEQ fzbgr gur Rguvbcvnaf orsber Nfn, naq orsber Whqnu;
naq gur Rguvbcvnaf syrq.

14:13 Naq Nfn naq gur crbcyr gung jrer jvgu uvz chefhrq gurz hagb
Trene: naq gur Rguvbcvnaf jrer bireguebja, gung gurl pbhyq abg erpbire
gurzfryirf; sbe gurl jrer qrfgeblrq orsber gur YBEQ, naq orsber uvf
ubfg; naq gurl pneevrq njnl irel zhpu fcbvy.

14:14 Naq gurl fzbgr nyy gur pvgvrf ebhaq nobhg Trene; sbe gur srne bs
gur YBEQ pnzr hcba gurz: naq gurl fcbvyrq nyy gur pvgvrf; sbe gurer
jnf rkprrqvat zhpu fcbvy va gurz.

14:15 Gurl fzbgr nyfb gur gragf bs pnggyr, naq pneevrq njnl furrc naq
pnzryf va nohaqnapr, naq erghearq gb Wrehfnyrz.

15:1 Naq gur Fcvevg bs Tbq pnzr hcba Nmnevnu gur fba bs Bqrq: 15:2 Naq
ur jrag bhg gb zrrg Nfn, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Urne lr zr, Nfn, naq nyy
Whqnu naq Orawnzva; Gur YBEQ vf jvgu lbh, juvyr lr or jvgu uvz; naq vs
lr frrx uvz, ur jvyy or sbhaq bs lbh; ohg vs lr sbefnxr uvz, ur jvyy
sbefnxr lbh.

15:3 Abj sbe n ybat frnfba Vfenry ungu orra jvgubhg gur gehr Tbq, naq
jvgubhg n grnpuvat cevrfg, naq jvgubhg ynj.

15:4 Ohg jura gurl va gurve gebhoyr qvq ghea hagb gur YBEQ Tbq bs
Vfenry, naq fbhtug uvz, ur jnf sbhaq bs gurz.

15:5 Naq va gubfr gvzrf gurer jnf ab crnpr gb uvz gung jrag bhg, abe
gb uvz gung pnzr va, ohg terng irkngvbaf jrer hcba nyy gur vaunovgnagf
bs gur pbhagevrf.

15:6 Naq angvba jnf qrfgeblrq bs angvba, naq pvgl bs pvgl: sbe Tbq qvq
irk gurz jvgu nyy nqirefvgl.

15:7 Or lr fgebat gurersber, naq yrg abg lbhe unaqf or jrnx: sbe lbhe
jbex funyy or erjneqrq.

15:8 Naq jura Nfn urneq gurfr jbeqf, naq gur cebcurpl bs Bqrq gur
cebcurg, ur gbbx pbhentr, naq chg njnl gur nobzvanoyr vqbyf bhg bs nyy
gur ynaq bs Whqnu naq Orawnzva, naq bhg bs gur pvgvrf juvpu ur unq
gnxra sebz zbhag Rcuenvz, naq erarjrq gur nygne bs gur YBEQ, gung jnf
orsber gur cbepu bs gur YBEQ.

15:9 Naq ur tngurerq nyy Whqnu naq Orawnzva, naq gur fgenatref jvgu
gurz bhg bs Rcuenvz naq Znanffru, naq bhg bs Fvzrba: sbe gurl sryy gb
uvz bhg bs Vfenry va nohaqnapr, jura gurl fnj gung gur YBEQ uvf Tbq
jnf jvgu uvz.

15:10 Fb gurl tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure ng Wrehfnyrz va gur guveq
zbagu, va gur svsgrragu lrne bs gur ervta bs Nfn.

15:11 Naq gurl bssrerq hagb gur YBEQ gur fnzr gvzr, bs gur fcbvy juvpu
gurl unq oebhtug, frira uhaqerq bkra naq frira gubhfnaq furrc.

15:12 Naq gurl ragrerq vagb n pbiranag gb frrx gur YBEQ Tbq bs gurve
snguref jvgu nyy gurve urneg naq jvgu nyy gurve fbhy; 15:13 Gung
jubfbrire jbhyq abg frrx gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry fubhyq or chg gb
qrngu, jurgure fznyy be terng, jurgure zna be jbzna.

15:14 Naq gurl fjner hagb gur YBEQ jvgu n ybhq ibvpr, naq jvgu
fubhgvat, naq jvgu gehzcrgf, naq jvgu pbeargf.

15:15 Naq nyy Whqnu erwbvprq ng gur bngu: sbe gurl unq fjbea jvgu nyy
gurve urneg, naq fbhtug uvz jvgu gurve jubyr qrfver; naq ur jnf sbhaq
bs gurz: naq gur YBEQ tnir gurz erfg ebhaq nobhg.

15:16 Naq nyfb pbapreavat Znnpunu gur zbgure bs Nfn gur xvat, ur
erzbirq ure sebz orvat dhrra, orpnhfr fur unq znqr na vqby va n tebir:
naq Nfn phg qbja ure vqby, naq fgnzcrq vg, naq oheag vg ng gur oebbx
Xvqeba.

15:17 Ohg gur uvtu cynprf jrer abg gnxra njnl bhg bs Vfenry:
arireguryrff gur urneg bs Nfn jnf cresrpg nyy uvf qnlf.

15:18 Naq ur oebhtug vagb gur ubhfr bs Tbq gur guvatf gung uvf sngure
unq qrqvpngrq, naq gung ur uvzfrys unq qrqvpngrq, fvyire, naq tbyq,
naq irffryf.

15:19 Naq gurer jnf ab zber jne hagb gur svir naq guvegvrgu lrne bs
gur ervta bs Nfn.

16:1 Va gur fvk naq guvegvrgu lrne bs gur ervta bs Nfn Onnfun xvat bs
Vfenry pnzr hc ntnvafg Whqnu, naq ohvyg Enznu, gb gur vagrag gung ur
zvtug yrg abar tb bhg be pbzr va gb Nfn xvat bs Whqnu.

16:2 Gura Nfn oebhtug bhg fvyire naq tbyq bhg bs gur gernfherf bs gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ naq bs gur xvat'f ubhfr, naq frag gb Oraunqnq xvat
bs Flevn, gung qjryg ng Qnznfphf, fnlvat, 16:3 Gurer vf n yrnthr
orgjrra zr naq gurr, nf gurer jnf orgjrra zl sngure naq gul sngure:
orubyq, V unir frag gurr fvyire naq tbyq; tb, oernx gul yrnthr jvgu
Onnfun xvat bs Vfenry, gung ur znl qrcneg sebz zr.

16:4 Naq Oraunqnq urnexrarq hagb xvat Nfn, naq frag gur pncgnvaf bs
uvf nezvrf ntnvafg gur pvgvrf bs Vfenry; naq gurl fzbgr Vwba, naq Qna,
naq Noryznvz, naq nyy gur fgber pvgvrf bs Ancugnyv.

16:5 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura Onnfun urneq vg, gung ur yrsg bss
ohvyqvat bs Enznu, naq yrg uvf jbex prnfr.

16:6 Gura Nfn gur xvat gbbx nyy Whqnu; naq gurl pneevrq njnl gur
fgbarf bs Enznu, naq gur gvzore gurerbs, jurerjvgu Onnfun jnf
ohvyqvat; naq ur ohvyg gurerjvgu Tron naq Zvmcnu.

16:7 Naq ng gung gvzr Unanav gur frre pnzr gb Nfn xvat bs Whqnu, naq
fnvq hagb uvz, Orpnhfr gubh unfg eryvrq ba gur xvat bs Flevn, naq abg
eryvrq ba gur YBEQ gul Tbq, gurersber vf gur ubfg bs gur xvat bs Flevn
rfpncrq bhg bs guvar unaq.

16:8 Jrer abg gur Rguvbcvnaf naq gur Yhovzf n uhtr ubfg, jvgu irel
znal punevbgf naq ubefrzra? lrg, orpnhfr gubh qvqfg eryl ba gur YBEQ,
ur qryvirerq gurz vagb guvar unaq.

16:9 Sbe gur rlrf bs gur YBEQ eha gb naq seb guebhtubhg gur jubyr
rnegu, gb furj uvzfrys fgebat va gur orunys bs gurz jubfr urneg vf
cresrpg gbjneq uvz. Urerva gubh unfg qbar sbbyvfuyl: gurersber sebz
uraprsbegu gubh funyg unir jnef.

16:10 Gura Nfn jnf jebgu jvgu gur frre, naq chg uvz va n cevfba ubhfr;
sbe ur jnf va n entr jvgu uvz orpnhfr bs guvf guvat. Naq Nfn bccerffrq
fbzr bs gur crbcyr gur fnzr gvzr.

16:11 Naq, orubyq, gur npgf bs Nfn, svefg naq ynfg, yb, gurl ner
jevggra va gur obbx bs gur xvatf bs Whqnu naq Vfenry.

16:12 Naq Nfn va gur guvegl naq avagu lrne bs uvf ervta jnf qvfrnfrq
va uvf srrg, hagvy uvf qvfrnfr jnf rkprrqvat terng: lrg va uvf qvfrnfr
ur fbhtug abg gb gur YBEQ, ohg gb gur culfvpvnaf.

16:13 Naq Nfn fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq qvrq va gur bar naq sbegvrgu
lrne bs uvf ervta.

16:14 Naq gurl ohevrq uvz va uvf bja frchypuerf, juvpu ur unq znqr sbe
uvzfrys va gur pvgl bs Qnivq, naq ynvq uvz va gur orq juvpu jnf svyyrq
jvgu fjrrg bqbhef naq qviref xvaqf bs fcvprf cercnerq ol gur
ncbgurpnevrf' neg: naq gurl znqr n irel terng oheavat sbe uvz.

17:1 Naq Wrubfuncung uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq, naq fgeratgurarq
uvzfrys ntnvafg Vfenry.

17:2 Naq ur cynprq sbeprf va nyy gur sraprq pvgvrf bs Whqnu, naq frg
tneevfbaf va gur ynaq bs Whqnu, naq va gur pvgvrf bs Rcuenvz, juvpu
Nfn uvf sngure unq gnxra.

17:3 Naq gur YBEQ jnf jvgu Wrubfuncung, orpnhfr ur jnyxrq va gur svefg
jnlf bs uvf sngure Qnivq, naq fbhtug abg hagb Onnyvz; 17:4 Ohg fbhtug
gb gur Ybeq Tbq bs uvf sngure, naq jnyxrq va uvf pbzznaqzragf, naq abg
nsgre gur qbvatf bs Vfenry.

17:5 Gurersber gur YBEQ fgnoyvfurq gur xvatqbz va uvf unaq; naq nyy
Whqnu oebhtug gb Wrubfuncung cerfragf; naq ur unq evpurf naq ubabhe va
nohaqnapr.

17:6 Naq uvf urneg jnf yvsgrq hc va gur jnlf bs gur YBEQ: zberbire ur
gbbx njnl gur uvtu cynprf naq tebirf bhg bs Whqnu.

17:7 Nyfb va gur guveq lrne bs uvf ervta ur frag gb uvf cevaprf, rira
gb Oraunvy, naq gb Bonqvnu, naq gb Mrpunevnu, naq gb Argunarry, naq gb
Zvpunvnu, gb grnpu va gur pvgvrf bs Whqnu.

17:8 Naq jvgu gurz ur frag Yrivgrf, rira Furznvnu, naq Argunavnu, naq
Mronqvnu, naq Nfnury, naq Furzvenzbgu, naq Wrubanguna, naq Nqbavwnu,
naq Gbovwnu, naq Gbonqbavwnu, Yrivgrf; naq jvgu gurz Ryvfunzn naq
Wrubenz, cevrfgf.

17:9 Naq gurl gnhtug va Whqnu, naq unq gur obbx bs gur ynj bs gur YBEQ
jvgu gurz, naq jrag nobhg guebhtubhg nyy gur pvgvrf bs Whqnu, naq
gnhtug gur crbcyr.

17:10 Naq gur srne bs gur YBEQ sryy hcba nyy gur xvatqbzf bs gur ynaqf
gung jrer ebhaq nobhg Whqnu, fb gung gurl znqr ab jne ntnvafg
Wrubfuncung.

17:11 Nyfb fbzr bs gur Cuvyvfgvarf oebhtug Wrubfuncung cerfragf, naq
gevohgr fvyire; naq gur Nenovnaf oebhtug uvz sybpxf, frira gubhfnaq
naq frira uhaqerq enzf, naq frira gubhfnaq naq frira uhaqerq ur tbngf.

17:12 Naq Wrubfuncung jnkrq terng rkprrqvatyl; naq ur ohvyg va Whqnu
pnfgyrf, naq pvgvrf bs fgber.

17:13 Naq ur unq zhpu ohfvarff va gur pvgvrf bs Whqnu: naq gur zra bs
jne, zvtugl zra bs inybhe, jrer va Wrehfnyrz.

17:14 Naq gurfr ner gur ahzoref bs gurz nppbeqvat gb gur ubhfr bs
gurve snguref: Bs Whqnu, gur pncgnvaf bs gubhfnaqf; Nqanu gur puvrs,
naq jvgu uvz zvtugl zra bs inybhe guerr uhaqerq gubhfnaq.

17:15 Naq arkg gb uvz jnf Wrubunana gur pncgnva, naq jvgu uvz gjb
uhaqerq naq sbhefpber gubhfnaq.

17:16 Naq arkg uvz jnf Nznfvnu gur fba bs Mvpuev, jub jvyyvatyl
bssrerq uvzfrys hagb gur YBEQ; naq jvgu uvz gjb uhaqerq gubhfnaq
zvtugl zra bs inybhe.

17:17 Naq bs Orawnzva; Ryvnqn n zvtugl zna bs inybhe, naq jvgu uvz
nezrq zra jvgu obj naq fuvryq gjb uhaqerq gubhfnaq.

17:18 Naq arkg uvz jnf Wrubmnonq, naq jvgu uvz na uhaqerq naq
sbhefpber gubhfnaq ernql cercnerq sbe gur jne.

17:19 Gurfr jnvgrq ba gur xvat, orfvqr gubfr jubz gur xvat chg va gur
sraprq pvgvrf guebhtubhg nyy Whqnu.

18:1 Abj Wrubfuncung unq evpurf naq ubabhe va nohaqnapr, naq wbvarq
nssvavgl jvgu Nuno.

18:2 Naq nsgre pregnva lrnef ur jrag qbja gb Nuno gb Fnznevn. Naq Nuno
xvyyrq furrc naq bkra sbe uvz va nohaqnapr, naq sbe gur crbcyr gung ur
unq jvgu uvz, naq crefhnqrq uvz gb tb hc jvgu uvz gb Enzbgutvyrnq.

18:3 Naq Nuno xvat bs Vfenry fnvq hagb Wrubfuncung xvat bs Whqnu, Jvyg
gubh tb jvgu zr gb Enzbgutvyrnq? Naq ur nafjrerq uvz, V nz nf gubh
neg, naq zl crbcyr nf gul crbcyr; naq jr jvyy or jvgu gurr va gur jne.

18:4 Naq Wrubfuncung fnvq hagb gur xvat bs Vfenry, Radhver, V cenl
gurr, ng gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ gb qnl.

18:5 Gurersber gur xvat bs Vfenry tngurerq gbtrgure bs cebcurgf sbhe
uhaqerq zra, naq fnvq hagb gurz, Funyy jr tb gb Enzbgutvyrnq gb
onggyr, be funyy V sbeorne? Naq gurl fnvq, Tb hc; sbe Tbq jvyy qryvire
vg vagb gur xvat'f unaq.

18:6 Ohg Wrubfuncung fnvq, Vf gurer abg urer n cebcurg bs gur YBEQ
orfvqrf, gung jr zvtug radhver bs uvz?  18:7 Naq gur xvat bs Vfenry
fnvq hagb Wrubfuncung, Gurer vf lrg bar zna, ol jubz jr znl radhver bs
gur YBEQ: ohg V ungr uvz; sbe ur arire cebcurfvrq tbbq hagb zr, ohg
nyjnlf rivy: gur fnzr vf Zvpnvnu gur fba bs Vzyn. Naq Wrubfuncung
fnvq, Yrg abg gur xvat fnl fb.

18:8 Naq gur xvat bs Vfenry pnyyrq sbe bar bs uvf bssvpref, naq fnvq,
Srgpu dhvpxyl Zvpnvnu gur fba bs Vzyn.

18:9 Naq gur xvat bs Vfenry naq Wrubfuncung xvat bs Whqnu fng rvgure
bs gurz ba uvf guebar, pybgurq va gurve eborf, naq gurl fng va n ibvq
cynpr ng gur ragrevat va bs gur tngr bs Fnznevn; naq nyy gur cebcurgf
cebcurfvrq orsber gurz.

18:10 Naq Mrqrxvnu gur fba bs Purannanu unq znqr uvz ubeaf bs veba,
naq fnvq, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Jvgu gurfr gubh funyg chfu Flevn hagvy
gurl or pbafhzrq.

18:11 Naq nyy gur cebcurgf cebcurfvrq fb, fnlvat, Tb hc gb
Enzbgutvyrnq, naq cebfcre: sbe gur YBEQ funyy qryvire vg vagb gur unaq
bs gur xvat.

18:12 Naq gur zrffratre gung jrag gb pnyy Zvpnvnu fcnxr gb uvz,
fnlvat, Orubyq, gur jbeqf bs gur cebcurgf qrpyner tbbq gb gur xvat
jvgu bar nffrag; yrg gul jbeq gurersber, V cenl gurr, or yvxr bar bs
gurve'f, naq fcrnx gubh tbbq.

18:13 Naq Zvpnvnu fnvq, Nf gur YBEQ yvirgu, rira jung zl Tbq fnvgu,
gung jvyy V fcrnx.

18:14 Naq jura ur jnf pbzr gb gur xvat, gur xvat fnvq hagb uvz,
Zvpnvnu, funyy jr tb gb Enzbgutvyrnq gb onggyr, be funyy V sbeorne?
Naq ur fnvq, Tb lr hc, naq cebfcre, naq gurl funyy or qryvirerq vagb
lbhe unaq.

18:15 Naq gur xvat fnvq gb uvz, Ubj znal gvzrf funyy V nqwher gurr
gung gubh fnl abguvat ohg gur gehgu gb zr va gur anzr bs gur YBEQ?
18:16 Gura ur fnvq, V qvq frr nyy Vfenry fpnggrerq hcba gur zbhagnvaf,
nf furrc gung unir ab furcureq: naq gur YBEQ fnvq, Gurfr unir ab
znfgre; yrg gurz erghea gurersber rirel zna gb uvf ubhfr va crnpr.

18:17 Naq gur xvat bs Vfenry fnvq gb Wrubfuncung, Qvq V abg gryy gurr
gung ur jbhyq abg cebcurfl tbbq hagb zr, ohg rivy?  18:18 Ntnva ur
fnvq, Gurersber urne gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ; V fnj gur YBEQ fvggvat hcba
uvf guebar, naq nyy gur ubfg bs urnira fgnaqvat ba uvf evtug unaq naq
ba uvf yrsg.

18:19 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq, Jub funyy ragvpr Nuno xvat bs Vfenry, gung ur
znl tb hc naq snyy ng Enzbgutvyrnq? Naq bar fcnxr fnlvat nsgre guvf
znaare, naq nabgure fnlvat nsgre gung znaare.

18:20 Gura gurer pnzr bhg n fcvevg, naq fgbbq orsber gur YBEQ, naq
fnvq, V jvyy ragvpr uvz. Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb uvz, Jurerjvgu?  18:21
Naq ur fnvq, V jvyy tb bhg, naq or n ylvat fcvevg va gur zbhgu bs nyy
uvf cebcurgf. Naq gur Ybeq fnvq, Gubh funyg ragvpr uvz, naq gubh funyg
nyfb cerinvy: tb bhg, naq qb rira fb.

18:22 Abj gurersber, orubyq, gur YBEQ ungu chg n ylvat fcvevg va gur
zbhgu bs gurfr gul cebcurgf, naq gur YBEQ ungu fcbxra rivy ntnvafg
gurr.

18:23 Gura Mrqrxvnu gur fba bs Purannanu pnzr arne, naq fzbgr Zvpnvnu
hcba gur purrx, naq fnvq, Juvpu jnl jrag gur Fcvevg bs gur YBEQ sebz
zr gb fcrnx hagb gurr?  18:24 Naq Zvpnvnu fnvq, Orubyq, gubh funyg frr
ba gung qnl jura gubh funyg tb vagb na vaare punzore gb uvqr gulfrys.

18:25 Gura gur xvat bs Vfenry fnvq, Gnxr lr Zvpnvnu, naq pneel uvz
onpx gb Nzba gur tbireabe bs gur pvgl, naq gb Wbnfu gur xvat'f fba;
18:26 Naq fnl, Guhf fnvgu gur xvat, Chg guvf sryybj va gur cevfba, naq
srrq uvz jvgu oernq bs nssyvpgvba naq jvgu jngre bs nssyvpgvba, hagvy
V erghea va crnpr.

18:27 Naq Zvpnvnu fnvq, Vs gubh pregnvayl erghea va crnpr, gura ungu
abg gur YBEQ fcbxra ol zr. Naq ur fnvq, Urnexra, nyy lr crbcyr.

18:28 Fb gur xvat bs Vfenry naq Wrubfuncung gur xvat bs Whqnu jrag hc
gb Enzbgutvyrnq.

18:29 Naq gur xvat bs Vfenry fnvq hagb Wrubfuncung, V jvyy qvfthvfr
zlfrys, naq V jvyy tb gb gur onggyr; ohg chg gubh ba gul eborf. Fb gur
xvat bs Vfenry qvfthvfrq uvzfrys; naq gurl jrag gb gur onggyr.

18:30 Abj gur xvat bs Flevn unq pbzznaqrq gur pncgnvaf bs gur punevbgf
gung jrer jvgu uvz, fnlvat, Svtug lr abg jvgu fznyy be terng, fnir
bayl jvgu gur xvat bs Vfenry.

18:31 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur pncgnvaf bs gur punevbgf fnj
Wrubfuncung, gung gurl fnvq, Vg vf gur xvat bs Vfenry. Gurersber gurl
pbzcnffrq nobhg uvz gb svtug: ohg Wrubfuncung pevrq bhg, naq gur YBEQ
urycrq uvz; naq Tbq zbirq gurz gb qrcneg sebz uvz.

18:32 Sbe vg pnzr gb cnff, gung, jura gur pncgnvaf bs gur punevbgf
creprvirq gung vg jnf abg gur xvat bs Vfenry, gurl ghearq onpx ntnva
sebz chefhvat uvz.

18:33 Naq n pregnva zna qerj n obj ng n iragher, naq fzbgr gur xvat bs
Vfenry orgjrra gur wbvagf bs gur unearff: gurersber ur fnvq gb uvf
punevbg zna, Ghea guvar unaq, gung gubh znlrfg pneel zr bhg bs gur
ubfg; sbe V nz jbhaqrq.

18:34 Naq gur onggyr vapernfrq gung qnl: ubjorvg gur xvat bs Vfenry
fgnlrq uvzfrys hc va uvf punevbg ntnvafg gur Flevnaf hagvy gur rira:
naq nobhg gur gvzr bs gur fha tbvat qbja ur qvrq.

19:1 Naq Wrubfuncung gur xvat bs Whqnu erghearq gb uvf ubhfr va crnpr
gb Wrehfnyrz.

19:2 Naq Wruh gur fba bs Unanav gur frre jrag bhg gb zrrg uvz, naq
fnvq gb xvat Wrubfuncung, Fubhyqrfg gubh uryc gur hatbqyl, naq ybir
gurz gung ungr gur YBEQ? gurersber vf jengu hcba gurr sebz orsber gur
YBEQ.

19:3 Arireguryrff gurer ner tbbq guvatf sbhaq va gurr, va gung gubh
unfg gnxra njnl gur tebirf bhg bs gur ynaq, naq unfg cercnerq guvar
urneg gb frrx Tbq.

19:4 Naq Wrubfuncung qjryg ng Wrehfnyrz: naq ur jrag bhg ntnva guebhtu
gur crbcyr sebz Orrefuron gb zbhag Rcuenvz, naq oebhtug gurz onpx hagb
gur YBEQ Tbq bs gurve snguref.

19:5 Naq ur frg whqtrf va gur ynaq guebhtubhg nyy gur sraprq pvgvrf bs
Whqnu, pvgl ol pvgl, 19:6 Naq fnvq gb gur whqtrf, Gnxr urrq jung lr
qb: sbe lr whqtr abg sbe zna, ohg sbe gur YBEQ, jub vf jvgu lbh va gur
whqtzrag.

19:7 Jurersber abj yrg gur srne bs gur YBEQ or hcba lbh; gnxr urrq naq
qb vg: sbe gurer vf ab vavdhvgl jvgu gur YBEQ bhe Tbq, abe erfcrpg bs
crefbaf, abe gnxvat bs tvsgf.

19:8 Zberbire va Wrehfnyrz qvq Wrubfuncung frg bs gur Yrivgrf, naq bs
gur cevrfgf, naq bs gur puvrs bs gur snguref bs Vfenry, sbe gur
whqtzrag bs gur YBEQ, naq sbe pbagebirefvrf, jura gurl erghearq gb
Wrehfnyrz.

19:9 Naq ur punetrq gurz, fnlvat, Guhf funyy lr qb va gur srne bs gur
YBEQ, snvgushyyl, naq jvgu n cresrpg urneg.

19:10 Naq jung pnhfr fbrire funyy pbzr gb lbh bs lbhe oerguera gung
qjryy va lbhe pvgvrf, orgjrra oybbq naq oybbq, orgjrra ynj naq
pbzznaqzrag, fgnghgrf naq whqtzragf, lr funyy rira jnea gurz gung gurl
gerfcnff abg ntnvafg gur YBEQ, naq fb jengu pbzr hcba lbh, naq hcba
lbhe oerguera: guvf qb, naq lr funyy abg gerfcnff.

19:11 Naq, orubyq, Nznevnu gur puvrs cevrfg vf bire lbh va nyy znggref
bs gur YBEQ; naq Mronqvnu gur fba bs Vfuznry, gur ehyre bs gur ubhfr
bs Whqnu, sbe nyy gur xvat'f znggref: nyfb gur Yrivgrf funyy or
bssvpref orsber lbh. Qrny pbhentrbhfyl, naq gur YBEQ funyy or jvgu gur
tbbq.

20:1 Vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre guvf nyfb, gung gur puvyqera bs Zbno, naq
gur puvyqera bs Nzzba, naq jvgu gurz bgure orfvqr gur Nzzbavgrf, pnzr
ntnvafg Wrubfuncung gb onggyr.

20:2 Gura gurer pnzr fbzr gung gbyq Wrubfuncung, fnlvat, Gurer pbzrgu
n terng zhygvghqr ntnvafg gurr sebz orlbaq gur frn ba guvf fvqr Flevn;
naq, orubyq, gurl or va Unmnmbagnzne, juvpu vf Ratrqv.

20:3 Naq Wrubfuncung srnerq, naq frg uvzfrys gb frrx gur YBEQ, naq
cebpynvzrq n snfg guebhtubhg nyy Whqnu.

20:4 Naq Whqnu tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure, gb nfx uryc bs gur YBEQ:
rira bhg bs nyy gur pvgvrf bs Whqnu gurl pnzr gb frrx gur YBEQ.

20:5 Naq Wrubfuncung fgbbq va gur pbatertngvba bs Whqnu naq Wrehfnyrz,
va gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, orsber gur arj pbheg, 20:6 Naq fnvq, B YBEQ
Tbq bs bhe snguref, neg abg gubh Tbq va urnira? naq ehyrfg abg gubh
bire nyy gur xvatqbzf bs gur urngura? naq va guvar unaq vf gurer abg
cbjre naq zvtug, fb gung abar vf noyr gb jvgufgnaq gurr?  20:7 Neg abg
gubh bhe Tbq, jub qvqfg qevir bhg gur vaunovgnagf bs guvf ynaq orsber
gul crbcyr Vfenry, naq tnirfg vg gb gur frrq bs Noenunz gul sevraq sbe
rire?  20:8 Naq gurl qjryg gurerva, naq unir ohvyg gurr n fnapghnel
gurerva sbe gul anzr, fnlvat, 20:9 Vs, jura rivy pbzrgu hcba hf, nf
gur fjbeq, whqtzrag, be crfgvyrapr, be snzvar, jr fgnaq orsber guvf
ubhfr, naq va gul cerfrapr, (sbe gul anzr vf va guvf ubhfr,) naq pel
hagb gurr va bhe nssyvpgvba, gura gubh jvyg urne naq uryc.

20:10 Naq abj, orubyq, gur puvyqera bs Nzzba naq Zbno naq zbhag Frve,
jubz gubh jbhyqrfg abg yrg Vfenry vainqr, jura gurl pnzr bhg bs gur
ynaq bs Rtlcg, ohg gurl ghearq sebz gurz, naq qrfgeblrq gurz abg;
20:11 Orubyq, V fnl, ubj gurl erjneq hf, gb pbzr gb pnfg hf bhg bs gul
cbffrffvba, juvpu gubh unfg tvira hf gb vaurevg.

20:12 B bhe Tbq, jvyg gubh abg whqtr gurz? sbe jr unir ab zvtug
ntnvafg guvf terng pbzcnal gung pbzrgu ntnvafg hf; arvgure xabj jr
jung gb qb: ohg bhe rlrf ner hcba gurr.

20:13 Naq nyy Whqnu fgbbq orsber gur YBEQ, jvgu gurve yvggyr barf,
gurve jvirf, naq gurve puvyqera.

20:14 Gura hcba Wnunmvry gur fba bs Mrpunevnu, gur fba bs Oranvnu, gur
fba bs Wrvry, gur fba bs Znggnavnu, n Yrivgr bs gur fbaf bs Nfncu,
pnzr gur Fcvevg bs gur YBEQ va gur zvqfg bs gur pbatertngvba; 20:15
Naq ur fnvq, Urnexra lr, nyy Whqnu, naq lr vaunovgnagf bs Wrehfnyrz,
naq gubh xvat Wrubfuncung, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ hagb lbh, Or abg nsenvq
abe qvfznlrq ol ernfba bs guvf terng zhygvghqr; sbe gur onggyr vf abg
lbhef, ohg Tbq'f.

20:16 Gb zbeebj tb lr qbja ntnvafg gurz: orubyq, gurl pbzr hc ol gur
pyvss bs Mvm; naq lr funyy svaq gurz ng gur raq bs gur oebbx, orsber
gur jvyqrearff bs Wrehry.

20:17 Lr funyy abg arrq gb svtug va guvf onggyr: frg lbhefryirf, fgnaq
lr fgvyy, naq frr gur fnyingvba bs gur YBEQ jvgu lbh, B Whqnu naq
Wrehfnyrz: srne abg, abe or qvfznlrq; gb zbeebj tb bhg ntnvafg gurz:
sbe gur YBEQ jvyy or jvgu lbh.

20:18 Naq Wrubfuncung objrq uvf urnq jvgu uvf snpr gb gur tebhaq: naq
nyy Whqnu naq gur vaunovgnagf bs Wrehfnyrz sryy orsber gur YBEQ,
jbefuvccvat gur YBEQ.

20:19 Naq gur Yrivgrf, bs gur puvyqera bs gur Xbunguvgrf, naq bs gur
puvyqera bs gur Xbeuvgrf, fgbbq hc gb cenvfr gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry
jvgu n ybhq ibvpr ba uvtu.

20:20 Naq gurl ebfr rneyl va gur zbeavat, naq jrag sbegu vagb gur
jvyqrearff bs Grxbn: naq nf gurl jrag sbegu, Wrubfuncung fgbbq naq
fnvq, Urne zr, B Whqnu, naq lr vaunovgnagf bs Wrehfnyrz; Oryvrir va
gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, fb funyy lr or rfgnoyvfurq; oryvrir uvf cebcurgf,
fb funyy lr cebfcre.

20:21 Naq jura ur unq pbafhygrq jvgu gur crbcyr, ur nccbvagrq fvatref
hagb gur YBEQ, naq gung fubhyq cenvfr gur ornhgl bs ubyvarff, nf gurl
jrag bhg orsber gur nezl, naq gb fnl, Cenvfr gur YBEQ; sbe uvf zrepl
raqhergu sbe rire.

20:22 Naq jura gurl ortna gb fvat naq gb cenvfr, gur YBEQ frg
nzohfuzragf ntnvafg gur puvyqera bs Nzzba, Zbno, naq zbhag Frve, juvpu
jrer pbzr ntnvafg Whqnu; naq gurl jrer fzvggra.

20:23 Sbe gur puvyqera bs Nzzba naq Zbno fgbbq hc ntnvafg gur
vaunovgnagf bs zbhag Frve, hggreyl gb fynl naq qrfgebl gurz: naq jura
gurl unq znqr na raq bs gur vaunovgnagf bs Frve, rirel bar urycrq gb
qrfgebl nabgure.

20:24 Naq jura Whqnu pnzr gbjneq gur jngpu gbjre va gur jvyqrearff,
gurl ybbxrq hagb gur zhygvghqr, naq, orubyq, gurl jrer qrnq obqvrf
snyyra gb gur rnegu, naq abar rfpncrq.

20:25 Naq jura Wrubfuncung naq uvf crbcyr pnzr gb gnxr njnl gur fcbvy
bs gurz, gurl sbhaq nzbat gurz va nohaqnapr obgu evpurf jvgu gur qrnq
obqvrf, naq cerpvbhf wrjryf, juvpu gurl fgevccrq bss sbe gurzfryirf,
zber guna gurl pbhyq pneel njnl: naq gurl jrer guerr qnlf va tngurevat
bs gur fcbvy, vg jnf fb zhpu.

20:26 Naq ba gur sbhegu qnl gurl nffrzoyrq gurzfryirf va gur inyyrl bs
Orenpunu; sbe gurer gurl oyrffrq gur YBEQ: gurersber gur anzr bs gur
fnzr cynpr jnf pnyyrq, Gur inyyrl bs Orenpunu, hagb guvf qnl.

20:27 Gura gurl erghearq, rirel zna bs Whqnu naq Wrehfnyrz, naq
Wrubfuncung va gur sbersebag bs gurz, gb tb ntnva gb Wrehfnyrz jvgu
wbl; sbe gur YBEQ unq znqr gurz gb erwbvpr bire gurve rarzvrf.

20:28 Naq gurl pnzr gb Wrehfnyrz jvgu cfnygrevrf naq unecf naq
gehzcrgf hagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

20:29 Naq gur srne bs Tbq jnf ba nyy gur xvatqbzf bs gubfr pbhagevrf,
jura gurl unq urneq gung gur YBEQ sbhtug ntnvafg gur rarzvrf bs
Vfenry.

20:30 Fb gur ernyz bs Wrubfuncung jnf dhvrg: sbe uvf Tbq tnir uvz erfg
ebhaq nobhg.

20:31 Naq Wrubfuncung ervtarq bire Whqnu: ur jnf guvegl naq svir lrnef
byq jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq ur ervtarq gjragl naq svir lrnef va
Wrehfnyrz.

Naq uvf zbgure'f anzr jnf Nmhonu gur qnhtugre bs Fuvyuv.

20:32 Naq ur jnyxrq va gur jnl bs Nfn uvf sngure, naq qrcnegrq abg
sebz vg, qbvat gung juvpu jnf evtug va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ.

20:33 Ubjorvg gur uvtu cynprf jrer abg gnxra njnl: sbe nf lrg gur
crbcyr unq abg cercnerq gurve urnegf hagb gur Tbq bs gurve snguref.

20:34 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Wrubfuncung, svefg naq ynfg, orubyq,
gurl ner jevggra va gur obbx bs Wruh gur fba bs Unanav, jub vf
zragvbarq va gur obbx bs gur xvatf bs Vfenry.

20:35 Naq nsgre guvf qvq Wrubfuncung xvat bs Whqnu wbva uvzfrys jvgu
Nunmvnu xvat bs Vfenry, jub qvq irel jvpxrqyl: 20:36 Naq ur wbvarq
uvzfrys jvgu uvz gb znxr fuvcf gb tb gb Gnefuvfu: naq gurl znqr gur
fuvcf va Rmvbatnore.

20:37 Gura Ryvrmre gur fba bs Qbqninu bs Znerfunu cebcurfvrq ntnvafg
Wrubfuncung, fnlvat, Orpnhfr gubh unfg wbvarq gulfrys jvgu Nunmvnu,
gur YBEQ ungu oebxra gul jbexf. Naq gur fuvcf jrer oebxra, gung gurl
jrer abg noyr gb tb gb Gnefuvfu.

21:1 Abj Wrubfuncung fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq jnf ohevrq jvgu uvf
snguref va gur pvgl bs Qnivq. Naq Wrubenz uvf fba ervtarq va uvf
fgrnq.

21:2 Naq ur unq oerguera gur fbaf bs Wrubfuncung, Nmnevnu, naq Wruvry,
naq Mrpunevnu, naq Nmnevnu, naq Zvpunry, naq Furcungvnu: nyy gurfr
jrer gur fbaf bs Wrubfuncung xvat bs Vfenry.

21:3 Naq gurve sngure tnir gurz terng tvsgf bs fvyire, naq bs tbyq,
naq bs cerpvbhf guvatf, jvgu sraprq pvgvrf va Whqnu: ohg gur xvatqbz
tnir ur gb Wrubenz; orpnhfr ur jnf gur svefgobea.

21:4 Abj jura Wrubenz jnf evfra hc gb gur xvatqbz bs uvf sngure, ur
fgeratgurarq uvzfrys, naq fyrj nyy uvf oerguera jvgu gur fjbeq, naq
qviref nyfb bs gur cevaprf bs Vfenry.

21:5 Wrubenz jnf guvegl naq gjb lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq
ur ervtarq rvtug lrnef va Wrehfnyrz.

21:6 Naq ur jnyxrq va gur jnl bs gur xvatf bs Vfenry, yvxr nf qvq gur
ubhfr bs Nuno: sbe ur unq gur qnhtugre bs Nuno gb jvsr: naq ur jebhtug
gung juvpu jnf rivy va gur rlrf bs gur YBEQ.

21:7 Ubjorvg gur YBEQ jbhyq abg qrfgebl gur ubhfr bs Qnivq, orpnhfr bs
gur pbiranag gung ur unq znqr jvgu Qnivq, naq nf ur cebzvfrq gb tvir n
yvtug gb uvz naq gb uvf fbaf sbe rire.

21:8 Va uvf qnlf gur Rqbzvgrf eribygrq sebz haqre gur qbzvavba bs
Whqnu, naq znqr gurzfryirf n xvat.

21:9 Gura Wrubenz jrag sbegu jvgu uvf cevaprf, naq nyy uvf punevbgf
jvgu uvz: naq ur ebfr hc ol avtug, naq fzbgr gur Rqbzvgrf juvpu
pbzcnffrq uvz va, naq gur pncgnvaf bs gur punevbgf.

21:10 Fb gur Rqbzvgrf eribygrq sebz haqre gur unaq bs Whqnu hagb guvf
qnl.

Gur fnzr gvzr nyfb qvq Yvoanu eribyg sebz haqre uvf unaq; orpnhfr ur
unq sbefnxra gur YBEQ Tbq bs uvf snguref.

21:11 Zberbire ur znqr uvtu cynprf va gur zbhagnvaf bs Whqnu naq
pnhfrq gur vaunovgnagf bs Wrehfnyrz gb pbzzvg sbeavpngvba, naq
pbzcryyrq Whqnu gurergb.

21:12 Naq gurer pnzr n jevgvat gb uvz sebz Ryvwnu gur cebcurg, fnlvat,
Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ Tbq bs Qnivq gul sngure, Orpnhfr gubh unfg abg
jnyxrq va gur jnlf bs Wrubfuncung gul sngure, abe va gur jnlf bs Nfn
xvat bs Whqnu, 21:13 Ohg unfg jnyxrq va gur jnl bs gur xvatf bs
Vfenry, naq unfg znqr Whqnu naq gur vaunovgnagf bs Wrehfnyrz gb tb n
jubevat, yvxr gb gur juberqbzf bs gur ubhfr bs Nuno, naq nyfb unfg
fynva gul oerguera bs gul sngure'f ubhfr, juvpu jrer orggre guna
gulfrys: 21:14 Orubyq, jvgu n terng cynthr jvyy gur YBEQ fzvgr gul
crbcyr, naq gul puvyqera, naq gul jvirf, naq nyy gul tbbqf: 21:15 Naq
gubh funyg unir terng fvpxarff ol qvfrnfr bs gul objryf, hagvy gul
objryf snyy bhg ol ernfba bs gur fvpxarff qnl ol qnl.

21:16 Zberbire gur YBEQ fgveerq hc ntnvafg Wrubenz gur fcvevg bs gur
Cuvyvfgvarf, naq bs gur Nenovnaf, gung jrer arne gur Rguvbcvnaf: 21:17
Naq gurl pnzr hc vagb Whqnu, naq oenxr vagb vg, naq pneevrq njnl nyy
gur fhofgnapr gung jnf sbhaq va gur xvat'f ubhfr, naq uvf fbaf nyfb,
naq uvf jvirf; fb gung gurer jnf arire n fba yrsg uvz, fnir Wrubnunm,
gur lbhatrfg bs uvf fbaf.

21:18 Naq nsgre nyy guvf gur YBEQ fzbgr uvz va uvf objryf jvgu na
vaphenoyr qvfrnfr.

21:19 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung va cebprff bs gvzr, nsgre gur raq bs
gjb lrnef, uvf objryf sryy bhg ol ernfba bs uvf fvpxarff: fb ur qvrq
bs fber qvfrnfrf. Naq uvf crbcyr znqr ab oheavat sbe uvz, yvxr gur
oheavat bs uvf snguref.

21:20 Guvegl naq gjb lrnef byq jnf ur jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq ur
ervtarq va Wrehfnyrz rvtug lrnef, naq qrcnegrq jvgubhg orvat qrfverq.
Ubjorvg gurl ohevrq uvz va gur pvgl bs Qnivq, ohg abg va gur
frchypuerf bs gur xvatf.

22:1 Naq gur vaunovgnagf bs Wrehfnyrz znqr Nunmvnu uvf lbhatrfg fba
xvat va uvf fgrnq: sbe gur onaq bs zra gung pnzr jvgu gur Nenovnaf gb
gur pnzc unq fynva nyy gur ryqrfg. Fb Nunmvnu gur fba bs Wrubenz xvat
bs Whqnu ervtarq.

22:2 Sbegl naq gjb lrnef byq jnf Nunmvnu jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq
ur ervtarq bar lrne va Wrehfnyrz. Uvf zbgure'f anzr nyfb jnf Ngunyvnu
gur qnhtugre bs Bzev.

22:3 Ur nyfb jnyxrq va gur jnlf bs gur ubhfr bs Nuno: sbe uvf zbgure
jnf uvf pbhafryybe gb qb jvpxrqyl.

22:4 Jurersber ur qvq rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ yvxr gur ubhfr bs
Nuno: sbe gurl jrer uvf pbhafryybef nsgre gur qrngu bs uvf sngure gb
uvf qrfgehpgvba.

22:5 Ur jnyxrq nyfb nsgre gurve pbhafry, naq jrag jvgu Wrubenz gur fba
bs Nuno xvat bs Vfenry gb jne ntnvafg Unmnry xvat bs Flevn ng
Enzbgutvyrnq: naq gur Flevnaf fzbgr Wbenz.

22:6 Naq ur erghearq gb or urnyrq va Wrmerry orpnhfr bs gur jbhaqf
juvpu jrer tvira uvz ng Enznu, jura ur sbhtug jvgu Unmnry xvat bs
Flevn. Naq Nmnevnu gur fba bs Wrubenz xvat bs Whqnu jrag qbja gb frr
Wrubenz gur fba bs Nuno ng Wrmerry, orpnhfr ur jnf fvpx.

22:7 Naq gur qrfgehpgvba bs Nunmvnu jnf bs Tbq ol pbzvat gb Wbenz: sbe
jura ur jnf pbzr, ur jrag bhg jvgu Wrubenz ntnvafg Wruh gur fba bs
Avzfuv, jubz gur YBEQ unq nabvagrq gb phg bss gur ubhfr bs Nuno.

22:8 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung, jura Wruh jnf rkrphgvat whqtzrag hcba
gur ubhfr bs Nuno, naq sbhaq gur cevaprf bs Whqnu, naq gur fbaf bs gur
oerguera bs Nunmvnu, gung zvavfgrerq gb Nunmvnu, ur fyrj gurz.

22:9 Naq ur fbhtug Nunmvnu: naq gurl pnhtug uvz, (sbe ur jnf uvq va
Fnznevn,) naq oebhtug uvz gb Wruh: naq jura gurl unq fynva uvz, gurl
ohevrq uvz: Orpnhfr, fnvq gurl, ur vf gur fba bs Wrubfuncung, jub
fbhtug gur YBEQ jvgu nyy uvf urneg. Fb gur ubhfr bs Nunmvnu unq ab
cbjre gb xrrc fgvyy gur xvatqbz.

22:10 Ohg jura Ngunyvnu gur zbgure bs Nunmvnu fnj gung ure fba jnf
qrnq, fur nebfr naq qrfgeblrq nyy gur frrq eblny bs gur ubhfr bs
Whqnu.

22:11 Ohg Wrubfunorngu, gur qnhtugre bs gur xvat, gbbx Wbnfu gur fba
bs Nunmvnu, naq fgbyr uvz sebz nzbat gur xvat'f fbaf gung jrer fynva,
naq chg uvz naq uvf ahefr va n orqpunzore. Fb Wrubfunorngu, gur
qnhtugre bs xvat Wrubenz, gur jvsr bs Wrubvnqn gur cevrfg, (sbe fur
jnf gur fvfgre bs Nunmvnu,) uvq uvz sebz Ngunyvnu, fb gung fur fyrj
uvz abg.

22:12 Naq ur jnf jvgu gurz uvq va gur ubhfr bs Tbq fvk lrnef: naq
Ngunyvnu ervtarq bire gur ynaq.

23:1 Naq va gur friragu lrne Wrubvnqn fgeratgurarq uvzfrys, naq gbbx
gur pncgnvaf bs uhaqerqf, Nmnevnu gur fba bs Wrebunz, naq Vfuznry gur
fba bs Wrubunana, naq Nmnevnu gur fba bs Borq, naq Znnfrvnu gur fba bs
Nqnvnu, naq Ryvfuncung gur fba bs Mvpuev, vagb pbiranag jvgu uvz.

23:2 Naq gurl jrag nobhg va Whqnu, naq tngurerq gur Yrivgrf bhg bs nyy
gur pvgvrf bs Whqnu, naq gur puvrs bs gur snguref bs Vfenry, naq gurl
pnzr gb Wrehfnyrz.

23:3 Naq nyy gur pbatertngvba znqr n pbiranag jvgu gur xvat va gur
ubhfr bs Tbq. Naq ur fnvq hagb gurz, Orubyq, gur xvat'f fba funyy
ervta, nf gur YBEQ ungu fnvq bs gur fbaf bs Qnivq.

23:4 Guvf vf gur guvat gung lr funyy qb; N guveq cneg bs lbh ragrevat
ba gur fnoongu, bs gur cevrfgf naq bs gur Yrivgrf, funyy or cbegref bs
gur qbbef; 23:5 Naq n guveq cneg funyy or ng gur xvat'f ubhfr; naq n
guveq cneg ng gur tngr bs gur sbhaqngvba: naq nyy gur crbcyr funyy or
va gur pbhegf bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

23:6 Ohg yrg abar pbzr vagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, fnir gur cevrfgf,
naq gurl gung zvavfgre bs gur Yrivgrf; gurl funyy tb va, sbe gurl ner
ubyl: ohg nyy gur crbcyr funyy xrrc gur jngpu bs gur YBEQ.

23:7 Naq gur Yrivgrf funyy pbzcnff gur xvat ebhaq nobhg, rirel zna
jvgu uvf jrncbaf va uvf unaq; naq jubfbrire ryfr pbzrgu vagb gur
ubhfr, ur funyy or chg gb qrngu: ohg or lr jvgu gur xvat jura ur
pbzrgu va, naq jura ur tbrgu bhg.

23:8 Fb gur Yrivgrf naq nyy Whqnu qvq nppbeqvat gb nyy guvatf gung
Wrubvnqn gur cevrfg unq pbzznaqrq, naq gbbx rirel zna uvf zra gung
jrer gb pbzr va ba gur fnoongu, jvgu gurz gung jrer gb tb bhg ba gur
fnoongu: sbe Wrubvnqn gur cevrfg qvfzvffrq abg gur pbhefrf.

23:9 Zberbire Wrubvnqn gur cevrfg qryvirerq gb gur pncgnvaf bs
uhaqerqf fcrnef, naq ohpxyref, naq fuvryqf, gung unq orra xvat
Qnivq'f, juvpu jrer va gur ubhfr bs Tbq.

23:10 Naq ur frg nyy gur crbcyr, rirel zna univat uvf jrncba va uvf
unaq, sebz gur evtug fvqr bs gur grzcyr gb gur yrsg fvqr bs gur
grzcyr, nybat ol gur nygne naq gur grzcyr, ol gur xvat ebhaq nobhg.

23:11 Gura gurl oebhtug bhg gur xvat'f fba, naq chg hcba uvz gur
pebja, naq tnir uvz gur grfgvzbal, naq znqr uvz xvat. Naq Wrubvnqn naq
uvf fbaf nabvagrq uvz, naq fnvq, Tbq fnir gur xvat.

23:12 Abj jura Ngunyvnu urneq gur abvfr bs gur crbcyr ehaavat naq
cenvfvat gur xvat, fur pnzr gb gur crbcyr vagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ:
23:13 Naq fur ybbxrq, naq, orubyq, gur xvat fgbbq ng uvf cvyyne ng gur
ragrevat va, naq gur cevaprf naq gur gehzcrgf ol gur xvat: naq nyy gur
crbcyr bs gur ynaq erwbvprq, naq fbhaqrq jvgu gehzcrgf, nyfb gur
fvatref jvgu vafgehzragf bs zhfvpx, naq fhpu nf gnhtug gb fvat cenvfr.
Gura Ngunyvnu erag ure pybgurf, naq fnvq, Gernfba, Gernfba.

23:14 Gura Wrubvnqn gur cevrfg oebhtug bhg gur pncgnvaf bs uhaqerqf
gung jrer frg bire gur ubfg, naq fnvq hagb gurz, Unir ure sbegu bs gur
enatrf: naq jubfb sbyybjrgu ure, yrg uvz or fynva jvgu gur fjbeq. Sbe
gur cevrfg fnvq, Fynl ure abg va gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

23:15 Fb gurl ynvq unaqf ba ure; naq jura fur jnf pbzr gb gur ragrevat
bs gur ubefr tngr ol gur xvat'f ubhfr, gurl fyrj ure gurer.

23:16 Naq Wrubvnqn znqr n pbiranag orgjrra uvz, naq orgjrra nyy gur
crbcyr, naq orgjrra gur xvat, gung gurl fubhyq or gur YBEQ'f crbcyr.

23:17 Gura nyy gur crbcyr jrag gb gur ubhfr bs Onny, naq oenxr vg
qbja, naq oenxr uvf nygnef naq uvf vzntrf va cvrprf, naq fyrj Znggna
gur cevrfg bs Onny orsber gur nygnef.

23:18 Nyfb Wrubvnqn nccbvagrq gur bssvprf bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ ol
gur unaq bs gur cevrfgf gur Yrivgrf, jubz Qnivq unq qvfgevohgrq va gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, gb bssre gur oheag bssrevatf bs gur YBEQ, nf vg vf
jevggra va gur ynj bs Zbfrf, jvgu erwbvpvat naq jvgu fvatvat, nf vg
jnf beqnvarq ol Qnivq.

23:19 Naq ur frg gur cbegref ng gur tngrf bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ,
gung abar juvpu jnf hapyrna va nal guvat fubhyq ragre va.

23:20 Naq ur gbbx gur pncgnvaf bs uhaqerqf, naq gur aboyrf, naq gur
tbireabef bs gur crbcyr, naq nyy gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq, naq oebhtug
qbja gur xvat sebz gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ: naq gurl pnzr guebhtu gur
uvtu tngr vagb gur xvat'f ubhfr, naq frg gur xvat hcba gur guebar bs
gur xvatqbz.

23:21 Naq nyy gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq erwbvprq: naq gur pvgl jnf dhvrg,
nsgre gung gurl unq fynva Ngunyvnu jvgu gur fjbeq.

24:1 Wbnfu jnf frira lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq ur ervtarq
sbegl lrnef va Wrehfnyrz. Uvf zbgure'f anzr nyfb jnf Mvovnu bs
Orrefuron.

24:2 Naq Wbnfu qvq gung juvpu jnf evtug va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ nyy
gur qnlf bs Wrubvnqn gur cevrfg.

24:3 Naq Wrubvnqn gbbx sbe uvz gjb jvirf; naq ur ortng fbaf naq
qnhtugref.

24:4 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff nsgre guvf, gung Wbnfu jnf zvaqrq gb ercnve
gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

24:5 Naq ur tngurerq gbtrgure gur cevrfgf naq gur Yrivgrf, naq fnvq gb
gurz, Tb bhg hagb gur pvgvrf bs Whqnu, naq tngure bs nyy Vfenry zbarl
gb ercnve gur ubhfr bs lbhe Tbq sebz lrne gb lrne, naq frr gung lr
unfgra gur znggre. Ubjorvg gur Yrivgrf unfgrarq vg abg.

24:6 Naq gur xvat pnyyrq sbe Wrubvnqn gur puvrs, naq fnvq hagb uvz,
Jul unfg gubh abg erdhverq bs gur Yrivgrf gb oevat va bhg bs Whqnu naq
bhg bs Wrehfnyrz gur pbyyrpgvba, nppbeqvat gb gur pbzznaqzrag bs Zbfrf
gur freinag bs gur YBEQ, naq bs gur pbatertngvba bs Vfenry, sbe gur
gnoreanpyr bs jvgarff?  24:7 Sbe gur fbaf bs Ngunyvnu, gung jvpxrq
jbzna, unq oebxra hc gur ubhfr bs Tbq; naq nyfb nyy gur qrqvpngrq
guvatf bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ qvq gurl orfgbj hcba Onnyvz.

24:8 Naq ng gur xvat'f pbzznaqzrag gurl znqr n purfg, naq frg vg
jvgubhg ng gur tngr bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

24:9 Naq gurl znqr n cebpynzngvba guebhtu Whqnu naq Wrehfnyrz, gb
oevat va gb gur YBEQ gur pbyyrpgvba gung Zbfrf gur freinag bs Tbq ynvq
hcba Vfenry va gur jvyqrearff.

24:10 Naq nyy gur cevaprf naq nyy gur crbcyr erwbvprq, naq oebhtug va,
naq pnfg vagb gur purfg, hagvy gurl unq znqr na raq.

24:11 Abj vg pnzr gb cnff, gung ng jung gvzr gur purfg jnf oebhtug
hagb gur xvat'f bssvpr ol gur unaq bs gur Yrivgrf, naq jura gurl fnj
gung gurer jnf zhpu zbarl, gur xvat'f fpevor naq gur uvtu cevrfg'f
bssvpre pnzr naq rzcgvrq gur purfg, naq gbbx vg, naq pneevrq vg gb uvf
cynpr ntnva. Guhf gurl qvq qnl ol qnl, naq tngurerq zbarl va
nohaqnapr.

24:12 Naq gur xvat naq Wrubvnqn tnir vg gb fhpu nf qvq gur jbex bs gur
freivpr bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq uverq znfbaf naq pnecragref gb
ercnve gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq nyfb fhpu nf jebhtug veba naq oenff
gb zraq gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

24:13 Fb gur jbexzra jebhtug, naq gur jbex jnf cresrpgrq ol gurz, naq
gurl frg gur ubhfr bs Tbq va uvf fgngr, naq fgeratgurarq vg.

24:14 Naq jura gurl unq svavfurq vg, gurl oebhtug gur erfg bs gur
zbarl orsber gur xvat naq Wrubvnqn, jurerbs jrer znqr irffryf sbe gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, rira irffryf gb zvavfgre, naq gb bssre jvguny, naq
fcbbaf, naq irffryf bs tbyq naq fvyire. Naq gurl bssrerq oheag
bssrevatf va gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ pbagvahnyyl nyy gur qnlf bs
Wrubvnqn.

24:15 Ohg Wrubvnqn jnkrq byq, naq jnf shyy bs qnlf jura ur qvrq; na
uhaqerq naq guvegl lrnef byq jnf ur jura ur qvrq.

24:16 Naq gurl ohevrq uvz va gur pvgl bs Qnivq nzbat gur xvatf,
orpnhfr ur unq qbar tbbq va Vfenry, obgu gbjneq Tbq, naq gbjneq uvf
ubhfr.

24:17 Abj nsgre gur qrngu bs Wrubvnqn pnzr gur cevaprf bs Whqnu, naq
znqr borvfnapr gb gur xvat. Gura gur xvat urnexrarq hagb gurz.

24:18 Naq gurl yrsg gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ Tbq bs gurve snguref, naq
freirq tebirf naq vqbyf: naq jengu pnzr hcba Whqnu naq Wrehfnyrz sbe
guvf gurve gerfcnff.

24:19 Lrg ur frag cebcurgf gb gurz, gb oevat gurz ntnva hagb gur YBEQ;
naq gurl grfgvsvrq ntnvafg gurz: ohg gurl jbhyq abg tvir rne.

24:20 Naq gur Fcvevg bs Tbq pnzr hcba Mrpunevnu gur fba bs Wrubvnqn
gur cevrfg, juvpu fgbbq nobir gur crbcyr, naq fnvq hagb gurz, Guhf
fnvgu Tbq, Jul genafterff lr gur pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ, gung lr
pnaabg cebfcre? orpnhfr lr unir sbefnxra gur YBEQ, ur ungu nyfb
sbefnxra lbh.

24:21 Naq gurl pbafcverq ntnvafg uvz, naq fgbarq uvz jvgu fgbarf ng
gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur xvat va gur pbheg bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

24:22 Guhf Wbnfu gur xvat erzrzorerq abg gur xvaqarff juvpu Wrubvnqn
uvf sngure unq qbar gb uvz, ohg fyrj uvf fba. Naq jura ur qvrq, ur
fnvq, Gur YBEQ ybbx hcba vg, naq erdhver vg.

24:23 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff ng gur raq bs gur lrne, gung gur ubfg bs
Flevn pnzr hc ntnvafg uvz: naq gurl pnzr gb Whqnu naq Wrehfnyrz, naq
qrfgeblrq nyy gur cevaprf bs gur crbcyr sebz nzbat gur crbcyr, naq
frag nyy gur fcbvy bs gurz hagb gur xvat bs Qnznfphf.

24:24 Sbe gur nezl bs gur Flevnaf pnzr jvgu n fznyy pbzcnal bs zra,
naq gur YBEQ qryvirerq n irel terng ubfg vagb gurve unaq, orpnhfr gurl
unq sbefnxra gur YBEQ Tbq bs gurve snguref. Fb gurl rkrphgrq whqtzrag
ntnvafg Wbnfu.

24:25 Naq jura gurl jrer qrcnegrq sebz uvz, (sbe gurl yrsg uvz va
terng qvfrnfrf,) uvf bja freinagf pbafcverq ntnvafg uvz sbe gur oybbq
bs gur fbaf bs Wrubvnqn gur cevrfg, naq fyrj uvz ba uvf orq, naq ur
qvrq: naq gurl ohevrq uvz va gur pvgl bs Qnivq, ohg gurl ohevrq uvz
abg va gur frchypuerf bs gur xvatf.

24:26 Naq gurfr ner gurl gung pbafcverq ntnvafg uvz; Mnonq gur fba bs
Fuvzrngu na Nzzbavgrff, naq Wrubmnonq gur fba bs Fuvzevgu n Zbnovgrff.

24:27 Abj pbapreavat uvf fbaf, naq gur terngarff bs gur oheqraf ynvq
hcba uvz, naq gur ercnvevat bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq, orubyq, gurl ner
jevggra va gur fgbel bs gur obbx bs gur xvatf. Naq Nznmvnu uvf fba
ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

25:1 Nznmvnu jnf gjragl naq svir lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq
ur ervtarq gjragl naq avar lrnef va Wrehfnyrz. Naq uvf zbgure'f anzr
jnf Wrubnqqna bs Wrehfnyrz.

25:2 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf evtug va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, ohg abg
jvgu n cresrpg urneg.

25:3 Abj vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur xvatqbz jnf rfgnoyvfurq gb uvz,
gung ur fyrj uvf freinagf gung unq xvyyrq gur xvat uvf sngure.

25:4 Ohg ur fyrj abg gurve puvyqera, ohg qvq nf vg vf jevggra va gur
ynj va gur obbx bs Zbfrf, jurer gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq, fnlvat, Gur
snguref funyy abg qvr sbe gur puvyqera, arvgure funyy gur puvyqera qvr
sbe gur snguref, ohg rirel zna funyy qvr sbe uvf bja fva.

25:5 Zberbire Nznmvnu tngurerq Whqnu gbtrgure, naq znqr gurz pncgnvaf
bire gubhfnaqf, naq pncgnvaf bire uhaqerqf, nppbeqvat gb gur ubhfrf bs
gurve snguref, guebhtubhg nyy Whqnu naq Orawnzva: naq ur ahzorerq gurz
sebz gjragl lrnef byq naq nobir, naq sbhaq gurz guerr uhaqerq gubhfnaq
pubvpr zra, noyr gb tb sbegu gb jne, gung pbhyq unaqyr fcrne naq
fuvryq.

25:6 Ur uverq nyfb na uhaqerq gubhfnaq zvtugl zra bs inybhe bhg bs
Vfenry sbe na uhaqerq gnyragf bs fvyire.

25:7 Ohg gurer pnzr n zna bs Tbq gb uvz, fnlvat, B xvat, yrg abg gur
nezl bs Vfenry tb jvgu gurr; sbe gur YBEQ vf abg jvgu Vfenry, gb jvg,
jvgu nyy gur puvyqera bs Rcuenvz.

25:8 Ohg vs gubh jvyg tb, qb vg; or fgebat sbe gur onggyr: Tbq funyy
znxr gurr snyy orsber gur rarzl: sbe Tbq ungu cbjre gb uryc, naq gb
pnfg qbja.

25:9 Naq Nznmvnu fnvq gb gur zna bs Tbq, Ohg jung funyy jr qb sbe gur
uhaqerq gnyragf juvpu V unir tvira gb gur nezl bs Vfenry? Naq gur zna
bs Tbq nafjrerq, Gur YBEQ vf noyr gb tvir gurr zhpu zber guna guvf.

25:10 Gura Nznmvnu frcnengrq gurz, gb jvg, gur nezl gung jnf pbzr gb
uvz bhg bs Rcuenvz, gb tb ubzr ntnva: jurersber gurve natre jnf
terngyl xvaqyrq ntnvafg Whqnu, naq gurl erghearq ubzr va terng natre.

25:11 Naq Nznmvnu fgeratgurarq uvzfrys, naq yrq sbegu uvf crbcyr, naq
jrag gb gur inyyrl bs fnyg, naq fzbgr bs gur puvyqera bs Frve gra
gubhfnaq.

25:12 Naq bgure gra gubhfnaq yrsg nyvir qvq gur puvyqera bs Whqnu
pneel njnl pncgvir, naq oebhtug gurz hagb gur gbc bs gur ebpx, naq
pnfg gurz qbja sebz gur gbc bs gur ebpx, gung gurl nyy jrer oebxra va
cvrprf.

25:13 Ohg gur fbyqvref bs gur nezl juvpu Nznmvnu frag onpx, gung gurl
fubhyq abg tb jvgu uvz gb onggyr, sryy hcba gur pvgvrf bs Whqnu, sebz
Fnznevn rira hagb Orguubeba, naq fzbgr guerr gubhfnaq bs gurz, naq
gbbx zhpu fcbvy.

25:14 Abj vg pnzr gb cnff, nsgre gung Nznmvnu jnf pbzr sebz gur
fynhtugre bs gur Rqbzvgrf, gung ur oebhtug gur tbqf bs gur puvyqera bs
Frve, naq frg gurz hc gb or uvf tbqf, naq objrq qbja uvzfrys orsber
gurz, naq ohearq vaprafr hagb gurz.

25:15 Jurersber gur natre bs gur YBEQ jnf xvaqyrq ntnvafg Nznmvnu, naq
ur frag hagb uvz n cebcurg, juvpu fnvq hagb uvz, Jul unfg gubh fbhtug
nsgre gur tbqf bs gur crbcyr, juvpu pbhyq abg qryvire gurve bja crbcyr
bhg bs guvar unaq?  25:16 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, nf ur gnyxrq jvgu uvz,
gung gur xvat fnvq hagb uvz, Neg gubh znqr bs gur xvat'f pbhafry?
sbeorne; jul fubhyqrfg gubh or fzvggra? Gura gur cebcurg sbeoner, naq
fnvq, V xabj gung Tbq ungu qrgrezvarq gb qrfgebl gurr, orpnhfr gubh
unfg qbar guvf, naq unfg abg urnexrarq hagb zl pbhafry.

25:17 Gura Nznmvnu xvat bs Whqnu gbbx nqivpr, naq frag gb Wbnfu, gur
fba bs Wrubnunm, gur fba bs Wruh, xvat bs Vfenry, fnlvat, Pbzr, yrg hf
frr bar nabgure va gur snpr.

25:18 Naq Wbnfu xvat bs Vfenry frag gb Nznmvnu xvat bs Whqnu, fnlvat,
Gur guvfgyr gung jnf va Yronaba frag gb gur prqne gung jnf va Yronaba,
fnlvat, Tvir gul qnhtugre gb zl fba gb jvsr: naq gurer cnffrq ol n
jvyq ornfg gung jnf va Yronaba, naq gebqr qbja gur guvfgyr.

25:19 Gubh fnlrfg, Yb, gubh unfg fzvggra gur Rqbzvgrf; naq guvar urneg
yvsgrgu gurr hc gb obnfg: novqr abj ng ubzr; jul fubhyqrfg gubh zrqqyr
gb guvar uheg, gung gubh fubhyqrfg snyy, rira gubh, naq Whqnu jvgu
gurr?  25:20 Ohg Nznmvnu jbhyq abg urne; sbe vg pnzr bs Tbq, gung ur
zvtug qryvire gurz vagb gur unaq bs gurve rarzvrf, orpnhfr gurl fbhtug
nsgre gur tbqf bs Rqbz.

25:21 Fb Wbnfu gur xvat bs Vfenry jrag hc; naq gurl fnj bar nabgure va
gur snpr, obgu ur naq Nznmvnu xvat bs Whqnu, ng Orgufurzrfu, juvpu
orybatrgu gb Whqnu.

25:22 Naq Whqnu jnf chg gb gur jbefr orsber Vfenry, naq gurl syrq
rirel zna gb uvf grag.

25:23 Naq Wbnfu gur xvat bs Vfenry gbbx Nznmvnu xvat bs Whqnu, gur fba
bs Wbnfu, gur fba bs Wrubnunm, ng Orgufurzrfu, naq oebhtug uvz gb
Wrehfnyrz, naq oenxr qbja gur jnyy bs Wrehfnyrz sebz gur tngr bs
Rcuenvz gb gur pbeare tngr, sbhe uhaqerq phovgf.

25:24 Naq ur gbbx nyy gur tbyq naq gur fvyire, naq nyy gur irffryf
gung jrer sbhaq va gur ubhfr bs Tbq jvgu Borqrqbz, naq gur gernfherf
bs gur xvat'f ubhfr, gur ubfgntrf nyfb, naq erghearq gb Fnznevn.

25:25 Naq Nznmvnu gur fba bs Wbnfu xvat bs Whqnu yvirq nsgre gur qrngu
bs Wbnfu fba bs Wrubnunm xvat bs Vfenry svsgrra lrnef.

25:26 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Nznmvnu, svefg naq ynfg, orubyq, ner
gurl abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur xvatf bs Whqnu naq Vfenry?  25:27
Abj nsgre gur gvzr gung Nznmvnu qvq ghea njnl sebz sbyybjvat gur YBEQ
gurl znqr n pbafcvenpl ntnvafg uvz va Wrehfnyrz; naq ur syrq gb
Ynpuvfu: ohg gurl frag gb Ynpuvfu nsgre uvz, naq fyrj uvz gurer.

25:28 Naq gurl oebhtug uvz hcba ubefrf, naq ohevrq uvz jvgu uvf
snguref va gur pvgl bs Whqnu.

26:1 Gura nyy gur crbcyr bs Whqnu gbbx Hmmvnu, jub jnf fvkgrra lrnef
byq, naq znqr uvz xvat va gur ebbz bs uvf sngure Nznmvnu.

26:2 Ur ohvyg Rybgu, naq erfgberq vg gb Whqnu, nsgre gung gur xvat
fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref.

26:3 Fvkgrra lrnef byq jnf Hmmvnu jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq ur
ervtarq svsgl naq gjb lrnef va Wrehfnyrz. Uvf zbgure'f anzr nyfb jnf
Wrpbyvnu bs Wrehfnyrz.

26:4 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf evtug va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ,
nppbeqvat gb nyy gung uvf sngure Nznmvnu qvq.

26:5 Naq ur fbhtug Tbq va gur qnlf bs Mrpunevnu, jub unq haqrefgnaqvat
va gur ivfvbaf bs Tbq: naq nf ybat nf ur fbhtug gur YBEQ, Tbq znqr uvz
gb cebfcre.

26:6 Naq ur jrag sbegu naq jneerq ntnvafg gur Cuvyvfgvarf, naq oenxr
qbja gur jnyy bs Tngu, naq gur jnyy bs Wnoaru, naq gur jnyy bs Nfuqbq,
naq ohvyg pvgvrf nobhg Nfuqbq, naq nzbat gur Cuvyvfgvarf.

26:7 Naq Tbq urycrq uvz ntnvafg gur Cuvyvfgvarf, naq ntnvafg gur
Nenovnaf gung qjryg va Theonny, naq gur Zruhavzf.

26:8 Naq gur Nzzbavgrf tnir tvsgf gb Hmmvnu: naq uvf anzr fcernq
noebnq rira gb gur ragrevat va bs Rtlcg; sbe ur fgeratgurarq uvzfrys
rkprrqvatyl.

26:9 Zberbire Hmmvnu ohvyg gbjref va Wrehfnyrz ng gur pbeare tngr, naq
ng gur inyyrl tngr, naq ng gur gheavat bs gur jnyy, naq sbegvsvrq
gurz.

26:10 Nyfb ur ohvyg gbjref va gur qrfreg, naq qvttrq znal jryyf: sbe
ur unq zhpu pnggyr, obgu va gur ybj pbhagel, naq va gur cynvaf:
uhfonaqzra nyfb, naq ivar qerffref va gur zbhagnvaf, naq va Pnezry:
sbe ur ybirq uhfonaqel.

26:11 Zberbire Hmmvnu unq na ubfg bs svtugvat zra, gung jrag bhg gb
jne ol onaqf, nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs gurve nppbhag ol gur unaq bs
Wrvry gur fpevor naq Znnfrvnu gur ehyre, haqre gur unaq bs Unanavnu,
bar bs gur xvat'f pncgnvaf.

26:12 Gur jubyr ahzore bs gur puvrs bs gur snguref bs gur zvtugl zra
bs inybhe jrer gjb gubhfnaq naq fvk uhaqerq.

26:13 Naq haqre gurve unaq jnf na nezl, guerr uhaqerq gubhfnaq naq
frira gubhfnaq naq svir uhaqerq, gung znqr jne jvgu zvtugl cbjre, gb
uryc gur xvat ntnvafg gur rarzl.

26:14 Naq Hmmvnu cercnerq sbe gurz guebhtubhg nyy gur ubfg fuvryqf,
naq fcrnef, naq uryzrgf, naq unoretrbaf, naq objf, naq fyvatf gb pnfg
fgbarf.

26:15 Naq ur znqr va Wrehfnyrz ratvarf, vairagrq ol phaavat zra, gb or
ba gur gbjref naq hcba gur ohyjnexf, gb fubbg neebjf naq terng fgbarf
jvguny.

Naq uvf anzr fcernq sne noebnq; sbe ur jnf zneiryybhfyl urycrq, gvyy
ur jnf fgebat.

26:16 Ohg jura ur jnf fgebat, uvf urneg jnf yvsgrq hc gb uvf
qrfgehpgvba: sbe ur genafterffrq ntnvafg gur YBEQ uvf Tbq, naq jrag
vagb gur grzcyr bs gur YBEQ gb ohea vaprafr hcba gur nygne bs vaprafr.

26:17 Naq Nmnevnu gur cevrfg jrag va nsgre uvz, naq jvgu uvz sbhefpber
cevrfgf bs gur YBEQ, gung jrer inyvnag zra: 26:18 Naq gurl jvgufgbbq
Hmmvnu gur xvat, naq fnvq hagb uvz, Vg nccregnvargu abg hagb gurr,
Hmmvnu, gb ohea vaprafr hagb gur YBEQ, ohg gb gur cevrfgf gur fbaf bs
Nneba, gung ner pbafrpengrq gb ohea vaprafr: tb bhg bs gur fnapghnel;
sbe gubh unfg gerfcnffrq; arvgure funyy vg or sbe guvar ubabhe sebz
gur YBEQ Tbq.

26:19 Gura Hmmvnu jnf jebgu, naq unq n prafre va uvf unaq gb ohea
vaprafr: naq juvyr ur jnf jebgu jvgu gur cevrfgf, gur yrcebfl rira
ebfr hc va uvf sberurnq orsber gur cevrfgf va gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ,
sebz orfvqr gur vaprafr nygne.

26:20 Naq Nmnevnu gur puvrs cevrfg, naq nyy gur cevrfgf, ybbxrq hcba
uvz, naq, orubyq, ur jnf yrcebhf va uvf sberurnq, naq gurl guehfg uvz
bhg sebz gurapr; lrn, uvzfrys unfgrq nyfb gb tb bhg, orpnhfr gur YBEQ
unq fzvggra uvz.

26:21 Naq Hmmvnu gur xvat jnf n yrcre hagb gur qnl bs uvf qrngu, naq
qjryg va n frireny ubhfr, orvat n yrcre; sbe ur jnf phg bss sebz gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ: naq Wbgunz uvf fba jnf bire gur xvat'f ubhfr,
whqtvat gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq.

26:22 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Hmmvnu, svefg naq ynfg, qvq Vfnvnu
gur cebcurg, gur fba bs Nzbm, jevgr.

26:23 Fb Hmmvnu fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq gurl ohevrq uvz jvgu uvf
snguref va gur svryq bs gur ohevny juvpu orybatrq gb gur xvatf; sbe
gurl fnvq, Ur vf n yrcre: naq Wbgunz uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

27:1 Wbgunz jnf gjragl naq svir lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq
ur ervtarq fvkgrra lrnef va Wrehfnyrz. Uvf zbgure'f anzr nyfb jnf
Wrehfunu, gur qnhtugre bs Mnqbx.

27:2 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf evtug va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ,
nppbeqvat gb nyy gung uvf sngure Hmmvnu qvq: ubjorvg ur ragrerq abg
vagb gur grzcyr bs gur YBEQ. Naq gur crbcyr qvq lrg pbeehcgyl.

27:3 Ur ohvyg gur uvtu tngr bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq ba gur jnyy
bs Bcury ur ohvyg zhpu.

27:4 Zberbire ur ohvyg pvgvrf va gur zbhagnvaf bs Whqnu, naq va gur
sberfgf ur ohvyg pnfgyrf naq gbjref.

27:5 Ur sbhtug nyfb jvgu gur xvat bs gur Nzzbavgrf, naq cerinvyrq
ntnvafg gurz. Naq gur puvyqera bs Nzzba tnir uvz gur fnzr lrne na
uhaqerq gnyragf bs fvyire, naq gra gubhfnaq zrnfherf bs jurng, naq gra
gubhfnaq bs oneyrl. Fb zhpu qvq gur puvyqera bs Nzzba cnl hagb uvz,
obgu gur frpbaq lrne, naq gur guveq.

27:6 Fb Wbgunz orpnzr zvtugl, orpnhfr ur cercnerq uvf jnlf orsber gur
YBEQ uvf Tbq.

27:7 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Wbgunz, naq nyy uvf jnef, naq uvf
jnlf, yb, gurl ner jevggra va gur obbx bs gur xvatf bs Vfenry naq
Whqnu.

27:8 Ur jnf svir naq gjragl lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq
ervtarq fvkgrra lrnef va Wrehfnyrz.

27:9 Naq Wbgunz fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq gurl ohevrq uvz va gur
pvgl bs Qnivq: naq Nunm uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

28:1 Nunm jnf gjragl lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq ur ervtarq
fvkgrra lrnef va Wrehfnyrz: ohg ur qvq abg gung juvpu jnf evtug va gur
fvtug bs gur YBEQ, yvxr Qnivq uvf sngure: 28:2 Sbe ur jnyxrq va gur
jnlf bs gur xvatf bs Vfenry, naq znqr nyfb zbygra vzntrf sbe Onnyvz.

28:3 Zberbire ur oheag vaprafr va gur inyyrl bs gur fba bs Uvaabz, naq
oheag uvf puvyqera va gur sver, nsgre gur nobzvangvbaf bs gur urngura
jubz gur YBEQ unq pnfg bhg orsber gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

28:4 Ur fnpevsvprq nyfb naq oheag vaprafr va gur uvtu cynprf, naq ba
gur uvyyf, naq haqre rirel terra gerr.

28:5 Jurersber gur YBEQ uvf Tbq qryvirerq uvz vagb gur unaq bs gur
xvat bs Flevn; naq gurl fzbgr uvz, naq pneevrq njnl n terng zhygvghqr
bs gurz pncgvirf, naq oebhtug gurz gb Qnznfphf. Naq ur jnf nyfb
qryvirerq vagb gur unaq bs gur xvat bs Vfenry, jub fzbgr uvz jvgu n
terng fynhtugre.

28:6 Sbe Crxnu gur fba bs Erznyvnu fyrj va Whqnu na uhaqerq naq gjragl
gubhfnaq va bar qnl, juvpu jrer nyy inyvnag zra; orpnhfr gurl unq
sbefnxra gur YBEQ Tbq bs gurve snguref.

28:7 Naq Mvpuev, n zvtugl zna bs Rcuenvz, fyrj Znnfrvnu gur xvat'f
fba, naq Nmevxnz gur tbireabe bs gur ubhfr, naq Ryxnanu gung jnf arkg
gb gur xvat.

28:8 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry pneevrq njnl pncgvir bs gurve oerguera
gjb uhaqerq gubhfnaq, jbzra, fbaf, naq qnhtugref, naq gbbx nyfb njnl
zhpu fcbvy sebz gurz, naq oebhtug gur fcbvy gb Fnznevn.

28:9 Ohg n cebcurg bs gur YBEQ jnf gurer, jubfr anzr jnf Bqrq: naq ur
jrag bhg orsber gur ubfg gung pnzr gb Fnznevn, naq fnvq hagb gurz,
Orubyq, orpnhfr gur YBEQ Tbq bs lbhe snguref jnf jebgu jvgu Whqnu, ur
ungu qryvirerq gurz vagb lbhe unaq, naq lr unir fynva gurz va n entr
gung ernpurgu hc hagb urnira.

28:10 Naq abj lr checbfr gb xrrc haqre gur puvyqera bs Whqnu naq
Wrehfnyrz sbe obaqzra naq obaqjbzra hagb lbh: ohg ner gurer abg jvgu
lbh, rira jvgu lbh, fvaf ntnvafg gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq?  28:11 Abj urne zr
gurersber, naq qryvire gur pncgvirf ntnva, juvpu lr unir gnxra pncgvir
bs lbhe oerguera: sbe gur svrepr jengu bs gur YBEQ vf hcba lbh.

28:12 Gura pregnva bs gur urnqf bs gur puvyqera bs Rcuenvz, Nmnevnu
gur fba bs Wbunana, Orerpuvnu gur fba bs Zrfuvyyrzbgu, naq Wruvmxvnu
gur fba bs Funyyhz, naq Nznfn gur fba bs Unqynv, fgbbq hc ntnvafg gurz
gung pnzr sebz gur jne, 28:13 Naq fnvq hagb gurz, Lr funyy abg oevat
va gur pncgvirf uvgure: sbe jurernf jr unir bssraqrq ntnvafg gur YBEQ
nyernql, lr vagraq gb nqq zber gb bhe fvaf naq gb bhe gerfcnff: sbe
bhe gerfcnff vf terng, naq gurer vf svrepr jengu ntnvafg Vfenry.

28:14 Fb gur nezrq zra yrsg gur pncgvirf naq gur fcbvy orsber gur
cevaprf naq nyy gur pbatertngvba.

28:15 Naq gur zra juvpu jrer rkcerffrq ol anzr ebfr hc, naq gbbx gur
pncgvirf, naq jvgu gur fcbvy pybgurq nyy gung jrer anxrq nzbat gurz,
naq neenlrq gurz, naq fubq gurz, naq tnir gurz gb rng naq gb qevax,
naq nabvagrq gurz, naq pneevrq nyy gur srroyr bs gurz hcba nffrf, naq
oebhtug gurz gb Wrevpub, gur pvgl bs cnyz gerrf, gb gurve oerguera:
gura gurl erghearq gb Fnznevn.

28:16 Ng gung gvzr qvq xvat Nunm fraq hagb gur xvatf bs Nfflevn gb
uryc uvz.

28:17 Sbe ntnva gur Rqbzvgrf unq pbzr naq fzvggra Whqnu, naq pneevrq
njnl pncgvirf.

28:18 Gur Cuvyvfgvarf nyfb unq vainqrq gur pvgvrf bs gur ybj pbhagel,
naq bs gur fbhgu bs Whqnu, naq unq gnxra Orgufurzrfu, naq Nwnyba, naq
Trqrebgu, naq Fubpub jvgu gur ivyyntrf gurerbs, naq Gvzanu jvgu gur
ivyyntrf gurerbs, Tvzmb nyfb naq gur ivyyntrf gurerbs: naq gurl qjryg
gurer.

28:19 Sbe gur YBEQ oebhtug Whqnu ybj orpnhfr bs Nunm xvat bs Vfenry;
sbe ur znqr Whqnu anxrq, naq genafterffrq fber ntnvafg gur YBEQ.

28:20 Naq Gvytngucvyarfre xvat bs Nfflevn pnzr hagb uvz, naq
qvfgerffrq uvz, ohg fgeratgurarq uvz abg.

28:21 Sbe Nunm gbbx njnl n cbegvba bhg bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq
bhg bs gur ubhfr bs gur xvat, naq bs gur cevaprf, naq tnir vg hagb gur
xvat bs Nfflevn: ohg ur urycrq uvz abg.

28:22 Naq va gur gvzr bs uvf qvfgerff qvq ur gerfcnff lrg zber ntnvafg
gur YBEQ: guvf vf gung xvat Nunm.

28:23 Sbe ur fnpevsvprq hagb gur tbqf bs Qnznfphf, juvpu fzbgr uvz:
naq ur fnvq, Orpnhfr gur tbqf bs gur xvatf bs Flevn uryc gurz,
gurersber jvyy V fnpevsvpr gb gurz, gung gurl znl uryc zr. Ohg gurl
jrer gur ehva bs uvz, naq bs nyy Vfenry.

28:24 Naq Nunm tngurerq gbtrgure gur irffryf bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq, naq
phg va cvrprf gur irffryf bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq, naq fuhg hc gur qbbef
bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq ur znqr uvz nygnef va rirel pbeare bs
Wrehfnyrz.

28:25 Naq va rirel frireny pvgl bs Whqnu ur znqr uvtu cynprf gb ohea
vaprafr hagb bgure tbqf, naq cebibxrq gb natre gur YBEQ Tbq bs uvf
snguref.

28:26 Abj gur erfg bs uvf npgf naq bs nyy uvf jnlf, svefg naq ynfg,
orubyq, gurl ner jevggra va gur obbx bs gur xvatf bs Whqnu naq Vfenry.

28:27 Naq Nunm fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq gurl ohevrq uvz va gur
pvgl, rira va Wrehfnyrz: ohg gurl oebhtug uvz abg vagb gur frchypuerf
bs gur xvatf bs Vfenry: naq Urmrxvnu uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

29:1 Urmrxvnu ortna gb ervta jura ur jnf svir naq gjragl lrnef byq,
naq ur ervtarq avar naq gjragl lrnef va Wrehfnyrz. Naq uvf zbgure'f
anzr jnf Novwnu, gur qnhtugre bs Mrpunevnu.

29:2 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf evtug va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ,
nppbeqvat gb nyy gung Qnivq uvf sngure unq qbar.

29:3 Ur va gur svefg lrne bs uvf ervta, va gur svefg zbagu, bcrarq gur
qbbef bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq ercnverq gurz.

29:4 Naq ur oebhtug va gur cevrfgf naq gur Yrivgrf, naq tngurerq gurz
gbtrgure vagb gur rnfg fgerrg, 29:5 Naq fnvq hagb gurz, Urne zr, lr
Yrivgrf, fnapgvsl abj lbhefryirf, naq fnapgvsl gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ
Tbq bs lbhe snguref, naq pneel sbegu gur svyguvarff bhg bs gur ubyl
cynpr.

29:6 Sbe bhe snguref unir gerfcnffrq, naq qbar gung juvpu jnf rivy va
gur rlrf bs gur YBEQ bhe Tbq, naq unir sbefnxra uvz, naq unir ghearq
njnl gurve snprf sebz gur unovgngvba bs gur YBEQ, naq ghearq gurve
onpxf.

29:7 Nyfb gurl unir fuhg hc gur qbbef bs gur cbepu, naq chg bhg gur
ynzcf, naq unir abg ohearq vaprafr abe bssrerq oheag bssrevatf va gur
ubyl cynpr hagb gur Tbq bs Vfenry.

29:8 Jurersber gur jengu bs gur YBEQ jnf hcba Whqnu naq Wrehfnyrz, naq
ur ungu qryvirerq gurz gb gebhoyr, gb nfgbavfuzrag, naq gb uvffvat, nf
lr frr jvgu lbhe rlrf.

29:9 Sbe, yb, bhe snguref unir snyyra ol gur fjbeq, naq bhe fbaf naq
bhe qnhtugref naq bhe jvirf ner va pncgvivgl sbe guvf.

29:10 Abj vg vf va zvar urneg gb znxr n pbiranag jvgu gur YBEQ Tbq bs
Vfenry, gung uvf svrepr jengu znl ghea njnl sebz hf.

29:11 Zl fbaf, or abg abj artyvtrag: sbe gur YBEQ ungu pubfra lbh gb
fgnaq orsber uvz, gb freir uvz, naq gung lr fubhyq zvavfgre hagb uvz,
naq ohea vaprafr.

29:12 Gura gur Yrivgrf nebfr, Znungu gur fba bs Nznfnv, naq Wbry gur
fba bs Nmnevnu, bs gur fbaf bs gur Xbunguvgrf: naq bs gur fbaf bs
Zrenev, Xvfu gur fba bs Noqv, naq Nmnevnu gur fba bs Wrunyryry: naq bs
gur Trefubavgrf; Wbnu gur fba bs Mvzznu, naq Rqra gur fba bs Wbnu:
29:13 Naq bs gur fbaf bs Ryvmncuna; Fuvzev, naq Wrvry: naq bs gur fbaf
bs Nfncu; Mrpunevnu, naq Znggnavnu: 29:14 Naq bs gur fbaf bs Urzna;
Wruvry, naq Fuvzrv: naq bs gur fbaf bs Wrqhguha; Furznvnu, naq Hmmvry.

29:15 Naq gurl tngurerq gurve oerguera, naq fnapgvsvrq gurzfryirf, naq
pnzr, nppbeqvat gb gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur xvat, ol gur jbeqf bs gur
YBEQ, gb pyrnafr gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

29:16 Naq gur cevrfgf jrag vagb gur vaare cneg bs gur ubhfr bs gur
YBEQ, gb pyrnafr vg, naq oebhtug bhg nyy gur hapyrnaarff gung gurl
sbhaq va gur grzcyr bs gur YBEQ vagb gur pbheg bs gur ubhfr bs gur
YBEQ. Naq gur Yrivgrf gbbx vg, gb pneel vg bhg noebnq vagb gur oebbx
Xvqeba.

29:17 Abj gurl ortna ba gur svefg qnl bs gur svefg zbagu gb fnapgvsl,
naq ba gur rvtugu qnl bs gur zbagu pnzr gurl gb gur cbepu bs gur YBEQ:
fb gurl fnapgvsvrq gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ va rvtug qnlf; naq va gur
fvkgrragu qnl bs gur svefg zbagu gurl znqr na raq.

29:18 Gura gurl jrag va gb Urmrxvnu gur xvat, naq fnvq, Jr unir
pyrnafrq nyy gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq gur nygne bs oheag bssrevat,
jvgu nyy gur irffryf gurerbs, naq gur furjoernq gnoyr, jvgu nyy gur
irffryf gurerbs.

29:19 Zberbire nyy gur irffryf, juvpu xvat Nunm va uvf ervta qvq pnfg
njnl va uvf genafterffvba, unir jr cercnerq naq fnapgvsvrq, naq,
orubyq, gurl ner orsber gur nygne bs gur YBEQ.

29:20 Gura Urmrxvnu gur xvat ebfr rneyl, naq tngurerq gur ehyref bs
gur pvgl, naq jrag hc gb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

29:21 Naq gurl oebhtug frira ohyybpxf, naq frira enzf, naq frira
ynzof, naq frira ur tbngf, sbe n fva bssrevat sbe gur xvatqbz, naq sbe
gur fnapghnel, naq sbe Whqnu. Naq ur pbzznaqrq gur cevrfgf gur fbaf bs
Nneba gb bssre gurz ba gur nygne bs gur YBEQ.

29:22 Fb gurl xvyyrq gur ohyybpxf, naq gur cevrfgf erprvirq gur oybbq,
naq fcevaxyrq vg ba gur nygne: yvxrjvfr, jura gurl unq xvyyrq gur
enzf, gurl fcevaxyrq gur oybbq hcba gur nygne: gurl xvyyrq nyfb gur
ynzof, naq gurl fcevaxyrq gur oybbq hcba gur nygne.

29:23 Naq gurl oebhtug sbegu gur ur tbngf sbe gur fva bssrevat orsber
gur xvat naq gur pbatertngvba; naq gurl ynvq gurve unaqf hcba gurz:
29:24 Naq gur cevrfgf xvyyrq gurz, naq gurl znqr erpbapvyvngvba jvgu
gurve oybbq hcba gur nygne, gb znxr na ngbarzrag sbe nyy Vfenry: sbe
gur xvat pbzznaqrq gung gur oheag bssrevat naq gur fva bssrevat fubhyq
or znqr sbe nyy Vfenry.

29:25 Naq ur frg gur Yrivgrf va gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ jvgu plzonyf,
jvgu cfnygrevrf, naq jvgu unecf, nppbeqvat gb gur pbzznaqzrag bs
Qnivq, naq bs Tnq gur xvat'f frre, naq Anguna gur cebcurg: sbe fb jnf
gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ ol uvf cebcurgf.

29:26 Naq gur Yrivgrf fgbbq jvgu gur vafgehzragf bs Qnivq, naq gur
cevrfgf jvgu gur gehzcrgf.

29:27 Naq Urmrxvnu pbzznaqrq gb bssre gur oheag bssrevat hcba gur
nygne.

Naq jura gur oheag bssrevat ortna, gur fbat bs gur YBEQ ortna nyfb
jvgu gur gehzcrgf, naq jvgu gur vafgehzragf beqnvarq ol Qnivq xvat bs
Vfenry.

29:28 Naq nyy gur pbatertngvba jbefuvccrq, naq gur fvatref fnat, naq
gur gehzcrgref fbhaqrq: naq nyy guvf pbagvahrq hagvy gur oheag
bssrevat jnf svavfurq.

29:29 Naq jura gurl unq znqr na raq bs bssrevat, gur xvat naq nyy gung
jrer cerfrag jvgu uvz objrq gurzfryirf, naq jbefuvccrq.

29:30 Zberbire Urmrxvnu gur xvat naq gur cevaprf pbzznaqrq gur Yrivgrf
gb fvat cenvfr hagb gur YBEQ jvgu gur jbeqf bs Qnivq, naq bs Nfncu gur
frre. Naq gurl fnat cenvfrf jvgu tynqarff, naq gurl objrq gurve urnqf
naq jbefuvccrq.

29:31 Gura Urmrxvnu nafjrerq naq fnvq, Abj lr unir pbafrpengrq
lbhefryirf hagb gur YBEQ, pbzr arne naq oevat fnpevsvprf naq gunax
bssrevatf vagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ. Naq gur pbatertngvba oebhtug va
fnpevsvprf naq gunax bssrevatf; naq nf znal nf jrer bs n serr urneg
oheag bssrevatf.

29:32 Naq gur ahzore bs gur oheag bssrevatf, juvpu gur pbatertngvba
oebhtug, jnf guerrfpber naq gra ohyybpxf, na uhaqerq enzf, naq gjb
uhaqerq ynzof: nyy gurfr jrer sbe n oheag bssrevat gb gur YBEQ.

29:33 Naq gur pbafrpengrq guvatf jrer fvk uhaqerq bkra naq guerr
gubhfnaq furrc.

29:34 Ohg gur cevrfgf jrer gbb srj, fb gung gurl pbhyq abg synl nyy
gur oheag bssrevatf: jurersber gurve oerguera gur Yrivgrf qvq uryc
gurz, gvyy gur jbex jnf raqrq, naq hagvy gur bgure cevrfgf unq
fnapgvsvrq gurzfryirf: sbe gur Yrivgrf jrer zber hcevtug va urneg gb
fnapgvsl gurzfryirf guna gur cevrfgf.

29:35 Naq nyfb gur oheag bssrevatf jrer va nohaqnapr, jvgu gur sng bs
gur crnpr bssrevatf, naq gur qevax bssrevatf sbe rirel oheag bssrevat.
Fb gur freivpr bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ jnf frg va beqre.

29:36 Naq Urmrxvnu erwbvprq, naq nyy gur crbcyr, gung Tbq unq cercnerq
gur crbcyr: sbe gur guvat jnf qbar fhqqrayl.

30:1 Naq Urmrxvnu frag gb nyy Vfenry naq Whqnu, naq jebgr yrggref nyfb
gb Rcuenvz naq Znanffru, gung gurl fubhyq pbzr gb gur ubhfr bs gur
YBEQ ng Wrehfnyrz, gb xrrc gur cnffbire hagb gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry.

30:2 Sbe gur xvat unq gnxra pbhafry, naq uvf cevaprf, naq nyy gur
pbatertngvba va Wrehfnyrz, gb xrrc gur cnffbire va gur frpbaq zbagu.

30:3 Sbe gurl pbhyq abg xrrc vg ng gung gvzr, orpnhfr gur cevrfgf unq
abg fnapgvsvrq gurzfryirf fhssvpvragyl, arvgure unq gur crbcyr
tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure gb Wrehfnyrz.

30:4 Naq gur guvat cyrnfrq gur xvat naq nyy gur pbatertngvba.

30:5 Fb gurl rfgnoyvfurq n qrperr gb znxr cebpynzngvba guebhtubhg nyy
Vfenry, sebz Orrefuron rira gb Qna, gung gurl fubhyq pbzr gb xrrc gur
cnffbire hagb gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry ng Wrehfnyrz: sbe gurl unq abg
qbar vg bs n ybat gvzr va fhpu fbeg nf vg jnf jevggra.

30:6 Fb gur cbfgf jrag jvgu gur yrggref sebz gur xvat naq uvf cevaprf
guebhtubhg nyy Vfenry naq Whqnu, naq nppbeqvat gb gur pbzznaqzrag bs
gur xvat, fnlvat, Lr puvyqera bs Vfenry, ghea ntnva hagb gur YBEQ Tbq
bs Noenunz, Vfnnp, naq Vfenry, naq ur jvyy erghea gb gur erzanag bs
lbh, gung ner rfpncrq bhg bs gur unaq bs gur xvatf bs Nfflevn.

30:7 Naq or abg lr yvxr lbhe snguref, naq yvxr lbhe oerguera, juvpu
gerfcnffrq ntnvafg gur YBEQ Tbq bs gurve snguref, jub gurersber tnir
gurz hc gb qrfbyngvba, nf lr frr.

30:8 Abj or lr abg fgvssarpxrq, nf lbhe snguref jrer, ohg lvryq
lbhefryirf hagb gur YBEQ, naq ragre vagb uvf fnapghnel, juvpu ur ungu
fnapgvsvrq sbe rire: naq freir gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq, gung gur svreprarff
bs uvf jengu znl ghea njnl sebz lbh.

30:9 Sbe vs lr ghea ntnva hagb gur YBEQ, lbhe oerguera naq lbhe
puvyqera funyy svaq pbzcnffvba orsber gurz gung yrnq gurz pncgvir, fb
gung gurl funyy pbzr ntnva vagb guvf ynaq: sbe gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq vf
tenpvbhf naq zrepvshy, naq jvyy abg ghea njnl uvf snpr sebz lbh, vs lr
erghea hagb uvz.

30:10 Fb gur cbfgf cnffrq sebz pvgl gb pvgl guebhtu gur pbhagel bs
Rcuenvz naq Znanffru rira hagb Mrohyha: ohg gurl ynhturq gurz gb
fpbea, naq zbpxrq gurz.

30:11 Arireguryrff qviref bs Nfure naq Znanffru naq bs Mrohyha uhzoyrq
gurzfryirf, naq pnzr gb Wrehfnyrz.

30:12 Nyfb va Whqnu gur unaq bs Tbq jnf gb tvir gurz bar urneg gb qb
gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur xvat naq bs gur cevaprf, ol gur jbeq bs gur
YBEQ.

30:13 Naq gurer nffrzoyrq ng Wrehfnyrz zhpu crbcyr gb xrrc gur srnfg
bs hayrnirarq oernq va gur frpbaq zbagu, n irel terng pbatertngvba.

30:14 Naq gurl nebfr naq gbbx njnl gur nygnef gung jrer va Wrehfnyrz,
naq nyy gur nygnef sbe vaprafr gbbx gurl njnl, naq pnfg gurz vagb gur
oebbx Xvqeba.

30:15 Gura gurl xvyyrq gur cnffbire ba gur sbhegrragu qnl bs gur
frpbaq zbagu: naq gur cevrfgf naq gur Yrivgrf jrer nfunzrq, naq
fnapgvsvrq gurzfryirf, naq oebhtug va gur oheag bssrevatf vagb gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

30:16 Naq gurl fgbbq va gurve cynpr nsgre gurve znaare, nppbeqvat gb
gur ynj bs Zbfrf gur zna bs Tbq: gur cevrfgf fcevaxyrq gur oybbq,
juvpu gurl erprvirq bs gur unaq bs gur Yrivgrf.

30:17 Sbe gurer jrer znal va gur pbatertngvba gung jrer abg
fnapgvsvrq: gurersber gur Yrivgrf unq gur punetr bs gur xvyyvat bs gur
cnffbiref sbe rirel bar gung jnf abg pyrna, gb fnapgvsl gurz hagb gur
YBEQ.

30:18 Sbe n zhygvghqr bs gur crbcyr, rira znal bs Rcuenvz, naq
Znanffru, Vffnpune, naq Mrohyha, unq abg pyrnafrq gurzfryirf, lrg qvq
gurl rng gur cnffbire bgurejvfr guna vg jnf jevggra. Ohg Urmrxvnu
cenlrq sbe gurz, fnlvat, Gur tbbq YBEQ cneqba rirel bar 30:19 Gung
cercnergu uvf urneg gb frrx Tbq, gur YBEQ Tbq bs uvf snguref, gubhtu
ur or abg pyrnafrq nppbeqvat gb gur chevsvpngvba bs gur fnapghnel.

30:20 Naq gur YBEQ urnexrarq gb Urmrxvnu, naq urnyrq gur crbcyr.

30:21 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry gung jrer cerfrag ng Wrehfnyrz xrcg
gur srnfg bs hayrnirarq oernq frira qnlf jvgu terng tynqarff: naq gur
Yrivgrf naq gur cevrfgf cenvfrq gur YBEQ qnl ol qnl, fvatvat jvgu ybhq
vafgehzragf hagb gur YBEQ.

30:22 Naq Urmrxvnu fcnxr pbzsbegnoyl hagb nyy gur Yrivgrf gung gnhtug
gur tbbq xabjyrqtr bs gur YBEQ: naq gurl qvq rng guebhtubhg gur srnfg
frira qnlf, bssrevat crnpr bssrevatf, naq znxvat pbasrffvba gb gur
YBEQ Tbq bs gurve snguref.

30:23 Naq gur jubyr nffrzoyl gbbx pbhafry gb xrrc bgure frira qnlf:
naq gurl xrcg bgure frira qnlf jvgu tynqarff.

30:24 Sbe Urmrxvnu xvat bs Whqnu qvq tvir gb gur pbatertngvba n
gubhfnaq ohyybpxf naq frira gubhfnaq furrc; naq gur cevaprf tnir gb
gur pbatertngvba n gubhfnaq ohyybpxf naq gra gubhfnaq furrc: naq n
terng ahzore bs cevrfgf fnapgvsvrq gurzfryirf.

30:25 Naq nyy gur pbatertngvba bs Whqnu, jvgu gur cevrfgf naq gur
Yrivgrf, naq nyy gur pbatertngvba gung pnzr bhg bs Vfenry, naq gur
fgenatref gung pnzr bhg bs gur ynaq bs Vfenry, naq gung qjryg va
Whqnu, erwbvprq.

30:26 Fb gurer jnf terng wbl va Wrehfnyrz: sbe fvapr gur gvzr bs
Fbybzba gur fba bs Qnivq xvat bs Vfenry gurer jnf abg gur yvxr va
Wrehfnyrz.

30:27 Gura gur cevrfgf gur Yrivgrf nebfr naq oyrffrq gur crbcyr: naq
gurve ibvpr jnf urneq, naq gurve cenlre pnzr hc gb uvf ubyl qjryyvat
cynpr, rira hagb urnira.

31:1 Abj jura nyy guvf jnf svavfurq, nyy Vfenry gung jrer cerfrag jrag
bhg gb gur pvgvrf bs Whqnu, naq oenxr gur vzntrf va cvrprf, naq phg
qbja gur tebirf, naq guerj qbja gur uvtu cynprf naq gur nygnef bhg bs
nyy Whqnu naq Orawnzva, va Rcuenvz nyfb naq Znanffru, hagvy gurl unq
hggreyl qrfgeblrq gurz nyy. Gura nyy gur puvyqera bs Vfenry erghearq,
rirel zna gb uvf cbffrffvba, vagb gurve bja pvgvrf.

31:2 Naq Urmrxvnu nccbvagrq gur pbhefrf bs gur cevrfgf naq gur Yrivgrf
nsgre gurve pbhefrf, rirel zna nppbeqvat gb uvf freivpr, gur cevrfgf
naq Yrivgrf sbe oheag bssrevatf naq sbe crnpr bssrevatf, gb zvavfgre,
naq gb tvir gunaxf, naq gb cenvfr va gur tngrf bs gur gragf bs gur
YBEQ.

31:3 Ur nccbvagrq nyfb gur xvat'f cbegvba bs uvf fhofgnapr sbe gur
oheag bssrevatf, gb jvg, sbe gur zbeavat naq riravat oheag bssrevatf,
naq gur oheag bssrevatf sbe gur fnoonguf, naq sbe gur arj zbbaf, naq
sbe gur frg srnfgf, nf vg vf jevggra va gur ynj bs gur YBEQ.

31:4 Zberbire ur pbzznaqrq gur crbcyr gung qjryg va Wrehfnyrz gb tvir
gur cbegvba bs gur cevrfgf naq gur Yrivgrf, gung gurl zvtug or
rapbhentrq va gur ynj bs gur YBEQ.

31:5 Naq nf fbba nf gur pbzznaqzrag pnzr noebnq, gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry oebhtug va nohaqnapr gur svefgsehvgf bs pbea, jvar, naq bvy,
naq ubarl, naq bs nyy gur vapernfr bs gur svryq; naq gur gvgur bs nyy
guvatf oebhtug gurl va nohaqnagyl.

31:6 Naq pbapreavat gur puvyqera bs Vfenry naq Whqnu, gung qjryg va
gur pvgvrf bs Whqnu, gurl nyfb oebhtug va gur gvgur bs bkra naq furrc,
naq gur gvgur bs ubyl guvatf juvpu jrer pbafrpengrq hagb gur YBEQ
gurve Tbq, naq ynvq gurz ol urncf.

31:7 Va gur guveq zbagu gurl ortna gb ynl gur sbhaqngvba bs gur urncf,
naq svavfurq gurz va gur friragu zbagu.

31:8 Naq jura Urmrxvnu naq gur cevaprf pnzr naq fnj gur urncf, gurl
oyrffrq gur YBEQ, naq uvf crbcyr Vfenry.

31:9 Gura Urmrxvnu dhrfgvbarq jvgu gur cevrfgf naq gur Yrivgrf
pbapreavat gur urncf.

31:10 Naq Nmnevnu gur puvrs cevrfg bs gur ubhfr bs Mnqbx nafjrerq uvz,
naq fnvq, Fvapr gur crbcyr ortna gb oevat gur bssrevatf vagb gur ubhfr
bs gur YBEQ, jr unir unq rabhtu gb rng, naq unir yrsg cyragl: sbe gur
YBEQ ungu oyrffrq uvf crbcyr; naq gung juvpu vf yrsg vf guvf terng
fgber.

31:11 Gura Urmrxvnu pbzznaqrq gb cercner punzoref va gur ubhfr bs gur
YBEQ; naq gurl cercnerq gurz, 31:12 Naq oebhtug va gur bssrevatf naq
gur gvgurf naq gur qrqvpngrq guvatf snvgushyyl: bire juvpu Pbabavnu
gur Yrivgr jnf ehyre, naq Fuvzrv uvf oebgure jnf gur arkg.

31:13 Naq Wruvry, naq Nmnmvnu, naq Anungu, naq Nfnury, naq Wrevzbgu,
naq Wbmnonq, naq Ryvry, naq Vfznpuvnu, naq Znungu, naq Oranvnu, jrer
birefrref haqre gur unaq bs Pbabavnu naq Fuvzrv uvf oebgure, ng gur
pbzznaqzrag bs Urmrxvnu gur xvat, naq Nmnevnu gur ehyre bs gur ubhfr
bs Tbq.

31:14 Naq Xber gur fba bs Vzanu gur Yrivgr, gur cbegre gbjneq gur
rnfg, jnf bire gur serrjvyy bssrevatf bs Tbq, gb qvfgevohgr gur
boyngvbaf bs gur YBEQ, naq gur zbfg ubyl guvatf.

31:15 Naq arkg uvz jrer Rqra, naq Zvavnzva, naq Wrfuhn, naq Furznvnu,
Nznevnu, naq Furpnavnu, va gur pvgvrf bs gur cevrfgf, va gurve frg
bssvpr, gb tvir gb gurve oerguera ol pbhefrf, nf jryy gb gur terng nf
gb gur fznyy: 31:16 Orfvqr gurve trarnybtl bs znyrf, sebz guerr lrnef
byq naq hcjneq, rira hagb rirel bar gung ragrergu vagb gur ubhfr bs
gur YBEQ, uvf qnvyl cbegvba sbe gurve freivpr va gurve punetrf
nppbeqvat gb gurve pbhefrf; 31:17 Obgu gb gur trarnybtl bs gur cevrfgf
ol gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref, naq gur Yrivgrf sebz gjragl lrnef byq
naq hcjneq, va gurve punetrf ol gurve pbhefrf; 31:18 Naq gb gur
trarnybtl bs nyy gurve yvggyr barf, gurve jvirf, naq gurve fbaf, naq
gurve qnhtugref, guebhtu nyy gur pbatertngvba: sbe va gurve frg bssvpr
gurl fnapgvsvrq gurzfryirf va ubyvarff: 31:19 Nyfb bs gur fbaf bs
Nneba gur cevrfgf, juvpu jrer va gur svryqf bs gur fhoheof bs gurve
pvgvrf, va rirel frireny pvgl, gur zra gung jrer rkcerffrq ol anzr, gb
tvir cbegvbaf gb nyy gur znyrf nzbat gur cevrfgf, naq gb nyy gung jrer
erpxbarq ol trarnybtvrf nzbat gur Yrivgrf.

31:20 Naq guhf qvq Urmrxvnu guebhtubhg nyy Whqnu, naq jebhtug gung
juvpu jnf tbbq naq evtug naq gehgu orsber gur YBEQ uvf Tbq.

31:21 Naq va rirel jbex gung ur ortna va gur freivpr bs gur ubhfr bs
Tbq, naq va gur ynj, naq va gur pbzznaqzragf, gb frrx uvf Tbq, ur qvq
vg jvgu nyy uvf urneg, naq cebfcrerq.

32:1 Nsgre gurfr guvatf, naq gur rfgnoyvfuzrag gurerbs, Fraanpurevo
xvat bs Nfflevn pnzr, naq ragrerq vagb Whqnu, naq rapnzcrq ntnvafg gur
sraprq pvgvrf, naq gubhtug gb jva gurz sbe uvzfrys.

32:2 Naq jura Urmrxvnu fnj gung Fraanpurevo jnf pbzr, naq gung ur jnf
checbfrq gb svtug ntnvafg Wrehfnyrz, 32:3 Ur gbbx pbhafry jvgu uvf
cevaprf naq uvf zvtugl zra gb fgbc gur jngref bs gur sbhagnvaf juvpu
jrer jvgubhg gur pvgl: naq gurl qvq uryc uvz.

32:4 Fb gurer jnf tngurerq zhpu crbcyr gbtrgure, jub fgbccrq nyy gur
sbhagnvaf, naq gur oebbx gung ena guebhtu gur zvqfg bs gur ynaq,
fnlvat, Jul fubhyq gur xvatf bs Nfflevn pbzr, naq svaq zhpu jngre?
32:5 Nyfb ur fgeratgurarq uvzfrys, naq ohvyg hc nyy gur jnyy gung jnf
oebxra, naq envfrq vg hc gb gur gbjref, naq nabgure jnyy jvgubhg, naq
ercnverq Zvyyb va gur pvgl bs Qnivq, naq znqr qnegf naq fuvryqf va
nohaqnapr.

32:6 Naq ur frg pncgnvaf bs jne bire gur crbcyr, naq tngurerq gurz
gbtrgure gb uvz va gur fgerrg bs gur tngr bs gur pvgl, naq fcnxr
pbzsbegnoyl gb gurz, fnlvat, 32:7 Or fgebat naq pbhentrbhf, or abg
nsenvq abe qvfznlrq sbe gur xvat bs Nfflevn, abe sbe nyy gur zhygvghqr
gung vf jvgu uvz: sbe gurer or zber jvgu hf guna jvgu uvz: 32:8 Jvgu
uvz vf na nez bs syrfu; ohg jvgu hf vf gur YBEQ bhe Tbq gb uryc hf,
naq gb svtug bhe onggyrf. Naq gur crbcyr erfgrq gurzfryirf hcba gur
jbeqf bs Urmrxvnu xvat bs Whqnu.

32:9 Nsgre guvf qvq Fraanpurevo xvat bs Nfflevn fraq uvf freinagf gb
Wrehfnyrz, (ohg ur uvzfrys ynvq fvrtr ntnvafg Ynpuvfu, naq nyy uvf
cbjre jvgu uvz,) hagb Urmrxvnu xvat bs Whqnu, naq hagb nyy Whqnu gung
jrer ng Wrehfnyrz, fnlvat, 32:10 Guhf fnvgu Fraanpurevo xvat bs
Nfflevn, Jurerba qb lr gehfg, gung lr novqr va gur fvrtr va Wrehfnyrz?
32:11 Qbgu abg Urmrxvnu crefhnqr lbh gb tvir bire lbhefryirf gb qvr ol
snzvar naq ol guvefg, fnlvat, Gur YBEQ bhe Tbq funyy qryvire hf bhg bs
gur unaq bs gur xvat bs Nfflevn?  32:12 Ungu abg gur fnzr Urmrxvnu
gnxra njnl uvf uvtu cynprf naq uvf nygnef, naq pbzznaqrq Whqnu naq
Wrehfnyrz, fnlvat, Lr funyy jbefuvc orsber bar nygne, naq ohea vaprafr
hcba vg?  32:13 Xabj lr abg jung V naq zl snguref unir qbar hagb nyy
gur crbcyr bs bgure ynaqf? jrer gur tbqf bs gur angvbaf bs gubfr ynaqf
nal jnlf noyr gb qryvire gurve ynaqf bhg bs zvar unaq?  32:14 Jub jnf
gurer nzbat nyy gur tbqf bs gubfr angvbaf gung zl snguref hggreyl
qrfgeblrq, gung pbhyq qryvire uvf crbcyr bhg bs zvar unaq, gung lbhe
Tbq fubhyq or noyr gb qryvire lbh bhg bs zvar unaq?  32:15 Abj
gurersber yrg abg Urmrxvnu qrprvir lbh, abe crefhnqr lbh ba guvf
znaare, arvgure lrg oryvrir uvz: sbe ab tbq bs nal angvba be xvatqbz
jnf noyr gb qryvire uvf crbcyr bhg bs zvar unaq, naq bhg bs gur unaq
bs zl snguref: ubj zhpu yrff funyy lbhe Tbq qryvire lbh bhg bs zvar
unaq?  32:16 Naq uvf freinagf fcnxr lrg zber ntnvafg gur YBEQ Tbq, naq
ntnvafg uvf freinag Urmrxvnu.

32:17 Ur jebgr nyfb yrggref gb envy ba gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, naq gb
fcrnx ntnvafg uvz, fnlvat, Nf gur tbqf bs gur angvbaf bs bgure ynaqf
unir abg qryvirerq gurve crbcyr bhg bs zvar unaq, fb funyy abg gur Tbq
bs Urmrxvnu qryvire uvf crbcyr bhg bs zvar unaq.

32:18 Gura gurl pevrq jvgu n ybhq ibvpr va gur Wrjf' fcrrpu hagb gur
crbcyr bs Wrehfnyrz gung jrer ba gur jnyy, gb nssevtug gurz, naq gb
gebhoyr gurz; gung gurl zvtug gnxr gur pvgl.

32:19 Naq gurl fcnxr ntnvafg gur Tbq bs Wrehfnyrz, nf ntnvafg gur tbqf
bs gur crbcyr bs gur rnegu, juvpu jrer gur jbex bs gur unaqf bs zna.

32:20 Naq sbe guvf pnhfr Urmrxvnu gur xvat, naq gur cebcurg Vfnvnu gur
fba bs Nzbm, cenlrq naq pevrq gb urnira.

32:21 Naq gur YBEQ frag na natry, juvpu phg bss nyy gur zvtugl zra bs
inybhe, naq gur yrnqref naq pncgnvaf va gur pnzc bs gur xvat bs
Nfflevn. Fb ur erghearq jvgu funzr bs snpr gb uvf bja ynaq. Naq jura
ur jnf pbzr vagb gur ubhfr bs uvf tbq, gurl gung pnzr sbegu bs uvf bja
objryf fyrj uvz gurer jvgu gur fjbeq.

32:22 Guhf gur YBEQ fnirq Urmrxvnu naq gur vaunovgnagf bs Wrehfnyrz
sebz gur unaq bs Fraanpurevo gur xvat bs Nfflevn, naq sebz gur unaq bs
nyy bgure, naq thvqrq gurz ba rirel fvqr.

32:23 Naq znal oebhtug tvsgf hagb gur YBEQ gb Wrehfnyrz, naq cerfragf
gb Urmrxvnu xvat bs Whqnu: fb gung ur jnf zntavsvrq va gur fvtug bs
nyy angvbaf sebz guraprsbegu.

32:24 Va gubfr qnlf Urmrxvnu jnf fvpx gb gur qrngu, naq cenlrq hagb
gur YBEQ: naq ur fcnxr hagb uvz, naq ur tnir uvz n fvta.

32:25 Ohg Urmrxvnu eraqrerq abg ntnva nppbeqvat gb gur orarsvg qbar
hagb uvz; sbe uvf urneg jnf yvsgrq hc: gurersber gurer jnf jengu hcba
uvz, naq hcba Whqnu naq Wrehfnyrz.

32:26 Abgjvgufgnaqvat Urmrxvnu uhzoyrq uvzfrys sbe gur cevqr bs uvf
urneg, obgu ur naq gur vaunovgnagf bs Wrehfnyrz, fb gung gur jengu bs
gur YBEQ pnzr abg hcba gurz va gur qnlf bs Urmrxvnu.

32:27 Naq Urmrxvnu unq rkprrqvat zhpu evpurf naq ubabhe: naq ur znqr
uvzfrys gernfhevrf sbe fvyire, naq sbe tbyq, naq sbe cerpvbhf fgbarf,
naq sbe fcvprf, naq sbe fuvryqf, naq sbe nyy znaare bs cyrnfnag
wrjryf; 32:28 Fgberubhfrf nyfb sbe gur vapernfr bs pbea, naq jvar, naq
bvy; naq fgnyyf sbe nyy znaare bs ornfgf, naq pbgrf sbe sybpxf.

32:29 Zberbire ur cebivqrq uvz pvgvrf, naq cbffrffvbaf bs sybpxf naq
ureqf va nohaqnapr: sbe Tbq unq tvira uvz fhofgnapr irel zhpu.

32:30 Guvf fnzr Urmrxvnu nyfb fgbccrq gur hccre jngrepbhefr bs Tvuba,
naq oebhtug vg fgenvtug qbja gb gur jrfg fvqr bs gur pvgl bs Qnivq.
Naq Urmrxvnu cebfcrerq va nyy uvf jbexf.

32:31 Ubjorvg va gur ohfvarff bs gur nzonffnqbef bs gur cevaprf bs
Onolyba, jub frag hagb uvz gb radhver bs gur jbaqre gung jnf qbar va
gur ynaq, Tbq yrsg uvz, gb gel uvz, gung ur zvtug xabj nyy gung jnf va
uvf urneg.

32:32 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Urmrxvnu, naq uvf tbbqarff, orubyq,
gurl ner jevggra va gur ivfvba bs Vfnvnu gur cebcurg, gur fba bs Nzbm,
naq va gur obbx bs gur xvatf bs Whqnu naq Vfenry.

32:33 Naq Urmrxvnu fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq gurl ohevrq uvz va gur
puvrsrfg bs gur frchypuerf bs gur fbaf bs Qnivq: naq nyy Whqnu naq gur
vaunovgnagf bs Wrehfnyrz qvq uvz ubabhe ng uvf qrngu. Naq Znanffru uvf
fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

33:1 Znanffru jnf gjryir lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq ur
ervtarq svsgl naq svir lrnef va Wrehfnyrz: 33:2 Ohg qvq gung juvpu jnf
rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, yvxr hagb gur nobzvangvbaf bs gur
urngura, jubz gur YBEQ unq pnfg bhg orsber gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

33:3 Sbe ur ohvyg ntnva gur uvtu cynprf juvpu Urmrxvnu uvf sngure unq
oebxra qbja, naq ur ernerq hc nygnef sbe Onnyvz, naq znqr tebirf, naq
jbefuvccrq nyy gur ubfg bs urnira, naq freirq gurz.

33:4 Nyfb ur ohvyg nygnef va gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, jurerbs gur YBEQ
unq fnvq, Va Wrehfnyrz funyy zl anzr or sbe rire.

33:5 Naq ur ohvyg nygnef sbe nyy gur ubfg bs urnira va gur gjb pbhegf
bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

33:6 Naq ur pnhfrq uvf puvyqera gb cnff guebhtu gur sver va gur inyyrl
bs gur fba bs Uvaabz: nyfb ur bofreirq gvzrf, naq hfrq rapunagzragf,
naq hfrq jvgpupensg, naq qrnyg jvgu n snzvyvne fcvevg, naq jvgu
jvmneqf: ur jebhtug zhpu rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, gb cebibxr uvz
gb natre.

33:7 Naq ur frg n pneirq vzntr, gur vqby juvpu ur unq znqr, va gur
ubhfr bs Tbq, bs juvpu Tbq unq fnvq gb Qnivq naq gb Fbybzba uvf fba,
Va guvf ubhfr, naq va Wrehfnyrz, juvpu V unir pubfra orsber nyy gur
gevorf bs Vfenry, jvyy V chg zl anzr sbe rire: 33:8 Arvgure jvyy V nal
zber erzbir gur sbbg bs Vfenry sebz bhg bs gur ynaq juvpu V unir
nccbvagrq sbe lbhe snguref; fb gung gurl jvyy gnxr urrq gb qb nyy gung
V unir pbzznaqrq gurz, nppbeqvat gb gur jubyr ynj naq gur fgnghgrf naq
gur beqvanaprf ol gur unaq bs Zbfrf.

33:9 Fb Znanffru znqr Whqnu naq gur vaunovgnagf bs Wrehfnyrz gb ree,
naq gb qb jbefr guna gur urngura, jubz gur YBEQ unq qrfgeblrq orsber
gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

33:10 Naq gur YBEQ fcnxr gb Znanffru, naq gb uvf crbcyr: ohg gurl
jbhyq abg urnexra.

33:11 Jurersber gur YBEQ oebhtug hcba gurz gur pncgnvaf bs gur ubfg bs
gur xvat bs Nfflevn, juvpu gbbx Znanffru nzbat gur gubeaf, naq obhaq
uvz jvgu srggref, naq pneevrq uvz gb Onolyba.

33:12 Naq jura ur jnf va nssyvpgvba, ur orfbhtug gur YBEQ uvf Tbq, naq
uhzoyrq uvzfrys terngyl orsber gur Tbq bs uvf snguref, 33:13 Naq
cenlrq hagb uvz: naq ur jnf vagerngrq bs uvz, naq urneq uvf
fhccyvpngvba, naq oebhtug uvz ntnva gb Wrehfnyrz vagb uvf xvatqbz.
Gura Znanffru xarj gung gur YBEQ ur jnf Tbq.

33:14 Abj nsgre guvf ur ohvyg n jnyy jvgubhg gur pvgl bs Qnivq, ba gur
jrfg fvqr bs Tvuba, va gur inyyrl, rira gb gur ragrevat va ng gur svfu
tngr, naq pbzcnffrq nobhg Bcury, naq envfrq vg hc n irel terng urvtug,
naq chg pncgnvaf bs jne va nyy gur sraprq pvgvrf bs Whqnu.

33:15 Naq ur gbbx njnl gur fgenatr tbqf, naq gur vqby bhg bs gur ubhfr
bs gur YBEQ, naq nyy gur nygnef gung ur unq ohvyg va gur zbhag bs gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq va Wrehfnyrz, naq pnfg gurz bhg bs gur pvgl.

33:16 Naq ur ercnverq gur nygne bs gur YBEQ, naq fnpevsvprq gurerba
crnpr bssrevatf naq gunax bssrevatf, naq pbzznaqrq Whqnu gb freir gur
YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry.

33:17 Arireguryrff gur crbcyr qvq fnpevsvpr fgvyy va gur uvtu cynprf,
lrg hagb gur YBEQ gurve Tbq bayl.

33:18 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Znanffru, naq uvf cenlre hagb uvf
Tbq, naq gur jbeqf bs gur frref gung fcnxr gb uvz va gur anzr bs gur
YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, orubyq, gurl ner jevggra va gur obbx bs gur xvatf
bs Vfenry.

33:19 Uvf cenlre nyfb, naq ubj Tbq jnf vagerngrq bs uvz, naq nyy uvf
fvaf, naq uvf gerfcnff, naq gur cynprf jurerva ur ohvyg uvtu cynprf,
naq frg hc tebirf naq tenira vzntrf, orsber ur jnf uhzoyrq: orubyq,
gurl ner jevggra nzbat gur fnlvatf bs gur frref.

33:20 Fb Znanffru fyrcg jvgu uvf snguref, naq gurl ohevrq uvz va uvf
bja ubhfr: naq Nzba uvf fba ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

33:21 Nzba jnf gjb naq gjragl lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq
ervtarq gjb lrnef va Wrehfnyrz.

33:22 Ohg ur qvq gung juvpu jnf rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, nf qvq
Znanffru uvf sngure: sbe Nzba fnpevsvprq hagb nyy gur pneirq vzntrf
juvpu Znanffru uvf sngure unq znqr, naq freirq gurz; 33:23 Naq uhzoyrq
abg uvzfrys orsber gur YBEQ, nf Znanffru uvf sngure unq uhzoyrq
uvzfrys; ohg Nzba gerfcnffrq zber naq zber.

33:24 Naq uvf freinagf pbafcverq ntnvafg uvz, naq fyrj uvz va uvf bja
ubhfr.

33:25 Ohg gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq fyrj nyy gurz gung unq pbafcverq
ntnvafg xvat Nzba; naq gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq znqr Wbfvnu uvf fba xvat
va uvf fgrnq.

34:1 Wbfvnu jnf rvtug lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq ur ervtarq
va Wrehfnyrz bar naq guvegl lrnef.

34:2 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf evtug va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ, naq
jnyxrq va gur jnlf bs Qnivq uvf sngure, naq qrpyvarq arvgure gb gur
evtug unaq, abe gb gur yrsg.

34:3 Sbe va gur rvtugu lrne bs uvf ervta, juvyr ur jnf lrg lbhat, ur
ortna gb frrx nsgre gur Tbq bs Qnivq uvf sngure: naq va gur gjrysgu
lrne ur ortna gb chetr Whqnu naq Wrehfnyrz sebz gur uvtu cynprf, naq
gur tebirf, naq gur pneirq vzntrf, naq gur zbygra vzntrf.

34:4 Naq gurl oenxr qbja gur nygnef bs Onnyvz va uvf cerfrapr; naq gur
vzntrf, gung jrer ba uvtu nobir gurz, ur phg qbja; naq gur tebirf, naq
gur pneirq vzntrf, naq gur zbygra vzntrf, ur oenxr va cvrprf, naq znqr
qhfg bs gurz, naq fgebjrq vg hcba gur tenirf bs gurz gung unq
fnpevsvprq hagb gurz.

34:5 Naq ur oheag gur obarf bs gur cevrfgf hcba gurve nygnef, naq
pyrnafrq Whqnu naq Wrehfnyrz.

34:6 Naq fb qvq ur va gur pvgvrf bs Znanffru, naq Rcuenvz, naq Fvzrba,
rira hagb Ancugnyv, jvgu gurve znggbpxf ebhaq nobhg.

34:7 Naq jura ur unq oebxra qbja gur nygnef naq gur tebirf, naq unq
orngra gur tenira vzntrf vagb cbjqre, naq phg qbja nyy gur vqbyf
guebhtubhg nyy gur ynaq bs Vfenry, ur erghearq gb Wrehfnyrz.

34:8 Abj va gur rvtugrragu lrne bs uvf ervta, jura ur unq chetrq gur
ynaq, naq gur ubhfr, ur frag Funcuna gur fba bs Nmnyvnu, naq Znnfrvnu
gur tbireabe bs gur pvgl, naq Wbnu gur fba bs Wbnunm gur erpbeqre, gb
ercnve gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ uvf Tbq.

34:9 Naq jura gurl pnzr gb Uvyxvnu gur uvtu cevrfg, gurl qryvirerq gur
zbarl gung jnf oebhtug vagb gur ubhfr bs Tbq, juvpu gur Yrivgrf gung
xrcg gur qbbef unq tngurerq bs gur unaq bs Znanffru naq Rcuenvz, naq
bs nyy gur erzanag bs Vfenry, naq bs nyy Whqnu naq Orawnzva; naq gurl
erghearq gb Wrehfnyrz.

34:10 Naq gurl chg vg va gur unaq bs gur jbexzra gung unq gur
birefvtug bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq gurl tnir vg gb gur jbexzra
gung jebhtug va gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, gb ercnve naq nzraq gur ubhfr:
34:11 Rira gb gur negvsvpref naq ohvyqref tnir gurl vg, gb ohl urja
fgbar, naq gvzore sbe pbhcyvatf, naq gb sybbe gur ubhfrf juvpu gur
xvatf bs Whqnu unq qrfgeblrq.

34:12 Naq gur zra qvq gur jbex snvgushyyl: naq gur birefrref bs gurz
jrer Wnungu naq Bonqvnu, gur Yrivgrf, bs gur fbaf bs Zrenev; naq
Mrpunevnu naq Zrfuhyynz, bs gur fbaf bs gur Xbunguvgrf, gb frg vg
sbejneq; naq bgure bs gur Yrivgrf, nyy gung pbhyq fxvyy bs vafgehzragf
bs zhfvpx.

34:13 Nyfb gurl jrer bire gur orneref bs oheqraf, naq jrer birefrref
bs nyy gung jebhtug gur jbex va nal znaare bs freivpr: naq bs gur
Yrivgrf gurer jrer fpevorf, naq bssvpref, naq cbegref.

34:14 Naq jura gurl oebhtug bhg gur zbarl gung jnf oebhtug vagb gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, Uvyxvnu gur cevrfg sbhaq n obbx bs gur ynj bs gur
YBEQ tvira ol Zbfrf.

34:15 Naq Uvyxvnu nafjrerq naq fnvq gb Funcuna gur fpevor, V unir
sbhaq gur obbx bs gur ynj va gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ. Naq Uvyxvnu
qryvirerq gur obbx gb Funcuna.

34:16 Naq Funcuna pneevrq gur obbx gb gur xvat, naq oebhtug gur xvat
jbeq onpx ntnva, fnlvat, Nyy gung jnf pbzzvggrq gb gul freinagf, gurl
qb vg.

34:17 Naq gurl unir tngurerq gbtrgure gur zbarl gung jnf sbhaq va gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq unir qryvirerq vg vagb gur unaq bs gur
birefrref, naq gb gur unaq bs gur jbexzra.

34:18 Gura Funcuna gur fpevor gbyq gur xvat, fnlvat, Uvyxvnu gur
cevrfg ungu tvira zr n obbx. Naq Funcuna ernq vg orsber gur xvat.

34:19 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur xvat unq urneq gur jbeqf bs gur
ynj, gung ur erag uvf pybgurf.

34:20 Naq gur xvat pbzznaqrq Uvyxvnu, naq Nuvxnz gur fba bs Funcuna,
naq Noqba gur fba bs Zvpnu, naq Funcuna gur fpevor, naq Nfnvnu n
freinag bs gur xvat'f, fnlvat, 34:21 Tb, radhver bs gur YBEQ sbe zr,
naq sbe gurz gung ner yrsg va Vfenry naq va Whqnu, pbapreavat gur
jbeqf bs gur obbx gung vf sbhaq: sbe terng vf gur jengu bs gur YBEQ
gung vf cbherq bhg hcba hf, orpnhfr bhe snguref unir abg xrcg gur jbeq
bs gur YBEQ, gb qb nsgre nyy gung vf jevggra va guvf obbx.

34:22 Naq Uvyxvnu, naq gurl gung gur xvat unq nccbvagrq, jrag gb
Uhyqnu gur cebcurgrff, gur jvsr bs Funyyhz gur fba bs Gvxingu, gur fba
bs Unfenu, xrrcre bs gur jneqebor; (abj fur qjryg va Wrehfnyrz va gur
pbyyrtr:) naq gurl fcnxr gb ure gb gung rssrpg.

34:23 Naq fur nafjrerq gurz, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, Gryy
lr gur zna gung frag lbh gb zr, 34:24 Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ, Orubyq, V
jvyy oevat rivy hcba guvf cynpr, naq hcba gur vaunovgnagf gurerbs,
rira nyy gur phefrf gung ner jevggra va gur obbx juvpu gurl unir ernq
orsber gur xvat bs Whqnu: 34:25 Orpnhfr gurl unir sbefnxra zr, naq
unir ohearq vaprafr hagb bgure tbqf, gung gurl zvtug cebibxr zr gb
natre jvgu nyy gur jbexf bs gurve unaqf; gurersber zl jengu funyy or
cbherq bhg hcba guvf cynpr, naq funyy abg or dhrapurq.

34:26 Naq nf sbe gur xvat bs Whqnu, jub frag lbh gb radhver bs gur
YBEQ, fb funyy lr fnl hagb uvz, Guhf fnvgu gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry
pbapreavat gur jbeqf juvpu gubh unfg urneq; 34:27 Orpnhfr guvar urneg
jnf graqre, naq gubh qvqfg uhzoyr gulfrys orsber Tbq, jura gubh
urneqrfg uvf jbeqf ntnvafg guvf cynpr, naq ntnvafg gur vaunovgnagf
gurerbs, naq uhzoyrqfg gulfrys orsber zr, naq qvqfg eraq gul pybgurf,
naq jrrc orsber zr; V unir rira urneq gurr nyfb, fnvgu gur YBEQ.

34:28 Orubyq, V jvyy tngure gurr gb gul snguref, naq gubh funyg or
tngurerq gb gul tenir va crnpr, arvgure funyy guvar rlrf frr nyy gur
rivy gung V jvyy oevat hcba guvf cynpr, naq hcba gur vaunovgnagf bs
gur fnzr. Fb gurl oebhtug gur xvat jbeq ntnva.

34:29 Gura gur xvat frag naq tngurerq gbtrgure nyy gur ryqref bs Whqnu
naq Wrehfnyrz.

34:30 Naq gur xvat jrag hc vagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq nyy gur zra
bs Whqnu, naq gur vaunovgnagf bs Wrehfnyrz, naq gur cevrfgf, naq gur
Yrivgrf, naq nyy gur crbcyr, terng naq fznyy: naq ur ernq va gurve
rnef nyy gur jbeqf bs gur obbx bs gur pbiranag gung jnf sbhaq va gur
ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

34:31 Naq gur xvat fgbbq va uvf cynpr, naq znqr n pbiranag orsber gur
YBEQ, gb jnyx nsgre gur YBEQ, naq gb xrrc uvf pbzznaqzragf, naq uvf
grfgvzbavrf, naq uvf fgnghgrf, jvgu nyy uvf urneg, naq jvgu nyy uvf
fbhy, gb cresbez gur jbeqf bs gur pbiranag juvpu ner jevggra va guvf
obbx.

34:32 Naq ur pnhfrq nyy gung jrer cerfrag va Wrehfnyrz naq Orawnzva gb
fgnaq gb vg. Naq gur vaunovgnagf bs Wrehfnyrz qvq nppbeqvat gb gur
pbiranag bs Tbq, gur Tbq bs gurve snguref.

34:33 Naq Wbfvnu gbbx njnl nyy gur nobzvangvbaf bhg bs nyy gur
pbhagevrf gung cregnvarq gb gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq znqr nyy gung
jrer cerfrag va Vfenry gb freir, rira gb freir gur YBEQ gurve Tbq. Naq
nyy uvf qnlf gurl qrcnegrq abg sebz sbyybjvat gur YBEQ, gur Tbq bs
gurve snguref.

35:1 Zberbire Wbfvnu xrcg n cnffbire hagb gur YBEQ va Wrehfnyrz: naq
gurl xvyyrq gur cnffbire ba gur sbhegrragu qnl bs gur svefg zbagu.

35:2 Naq ur frg gur cevrfgf va gurve punetrf, naq rapbhentrq gurz gb
gur freivpr bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, 35:3 Naq fnvq hagb gur Yrivgrf
gung gnhtug nyy Vfenry, juvpu jrer ubyl hagb gur YBEQ, Chg gur ubyl
nex va gur ubhfr juvpu Fbybzba gur fba bs Qnivq xvat bs Vfenry qvq
ohvyq; vg funyy abg or n oheqra hcba lbhe fubhyqref: freir abj gur
YBEQ lbhe Tbq, naq uvf crbcyr Vfenry, 35:4 Naq cercner lbhefryirf ol
gur ubhfrf bs lbhe snguref, nsgre lbhe pbhefrf, nppbeqvat gb gur
jevgvat bs Qnivq xvat bs Vfenry, naq nppbeqvat gb gur jevgvat bs
Fbybzba uvf fba.

35:5 Naq fgnaq va gur ubyl cynpr nppbeqvat gb gur qvivfvbaf bs gur
snzvyvrf bs gur snguref bs lbhe oerguera gur crbcyr, naq nsgre gur
qvivfvba bs gur snzvyvrf bs gur Yrivgrf.

35:6 Fb xvyy gur cnffbire, naq fnapgvsl lbhefryirf, naq cercner lbhe
oerguera, gung gurl znl qb nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ ol gur
unaq bs Zbfrf.

35:7 Naq Wbfvnu tnir gb gur crbcyr, bs gur sybpx, ynzof naq xvqf, nyy
sbe gur cnffbire bssrevatf, sbe nyy gung jrer cerfrag, gb gur ahzore
bs guvegl gubhfnaq, naq guerr gubhfnaq ohyybpxf: gurfr jrer bs gur
xvat'f fhofgnapr.

35:8 Naq uvf cevaprf tnir jvyyvatyl hagb gur crbcyr, gb gur cevrfgf,
naq gb gur Yrivgrf: Uvyxvnu naq Mrpunevnu naq Wruvry, ehyref bs gur
ubhfr bs Tbq, tnir hagb gur cevrfgf sbe gur cnffbire bssrevatf gjb
gubhfnaq naq fvk uhaqerq fznyy pnggyr naq guerr uhaqerq bkra.

35:9 Pbanavnu nyfb, naq Furznvnu naq Argunarry, uvf oerguera, naq
Unfunovnu naq Wrvry naq Wbmnonq, puvrs bs gur Yrivgrf, tnir hagb gur
Yrivgrf sbe cnffbire bssrevatf svir gubhfnaq fznyy pnggyr, naq svir
uhaqerq bkra.

35:10 Fb gur freivpr jnf cercnerq, naq gur cevrfgf fgbbq va gurve
cynpr, naq gur Yrivgrf va gurve pbhefrf, nppbeqvat gb gur xvat'f
pbzznaqzrag.

35:11 Naq gurl xvyyrq gur cnffbire, naq gur cevrfgf fcevaxyrq gur
oybbq sebz gurve unaqf, naq gur Yrivgrf synlrq gurz.

35:12 Naq gurl erzbirq gur oheag bssrevatf, gung gurl zvtug tvir
nppbeqvat gb gur qvivfvbaf bs gur snzvyvrf bs gur crbcyr, gb bssre
hagb gur YBEQ, nf vg vf jevggra va gur obbx bs Zbfrf. Naq fb qvq gurl
jvgu gur bkra.

35:13 Naq gurl ebnfgrq gur cnffbire jvgu sver nppbeqvat gb gur
beqvanapr: ohg gur bgure ubyl bssrevatf fbq gurl va cbgf, naq va
pnyqebaf, naq va cnaf, naq qvivqrq gurz fcrrqvyl nzbat nyy gur crbcyr.

35:14 Naq nsgrejneq gurl znqr ernql sbe gurzfryirf, naq sbe gur
cevrfgf: orpnhfr gur cevrfgf gur fbaf bs Nneba jrer ohfvrq va bssrevat
bs oheag bssrevatf naq gur sng hagvy avtug; gurersber gur Yrivgrf
cercnerq sbe gurzfryirf, naq sbe gur cevrfgf gur fbaf bs Nneba.

35:15 Naq gur fvatref gur fbaf bs Nfncu jrer va gurve cynpr, nppbeqvat
gb gur pbzznaqzrag bs Qnivq, naq Nfncu, naq Urzna, naq Wrqhguha gur
xvat'f frre; naq gur cbegref jnvgrq ng rirel tngr; gurl zvtug abg
qrcneg sebz gurve freivpr; sbe gurve oerguera gur Yrivgrf cercnerq sbe
gurz.

35:16 Fb nyy gur freivpr bs gur YBEQ jnf cercnerq gur fnzr qnl, gb
xrrc gur cnffbire, naq gb bssre oheag bssrevatf hcba gur nygne bs gur
YBEQ, nppbeqvat gb gur pbzznaqzrag bs xvat Wbfvnu.

35:17 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry gung jrer cerfrag xrcg gur cnffbire
ng gung gvzr, naq gur srnfg bs hayrnirarq oernq frira qnlf.

35:18 Naq gurer jnf ab cnffbire yvxr gb gung xrcg va Vfenry sebz gur
qnlf bs Fnzhry gur cebcurg; arvgure qvq nyy gur xvatf bs Vfenry xrrc
fhpu n cnffbire nf Wbfvnu xrcg, naq gur cevrfgf, naq gur Yrivgrf, naq
nyy Whqnu naq Vfenry gung jrer cerfrag, naq gur vaunovgnagf bs
Wrehfnyrz.

35:19 Va gur rvtugrragu lrne bs gur ervta bs Wbfvnu jnf guvf cnffbire
xrcg.

35:20 Nsgre nyy guvf, jura Wbfvnu unq cercnerq gur grzcyr, Arpub xvat
bs Rtlcg pnzr hc gb svtug ntnvafg Punepurzvfu ol Rhcuengrf: naq Wbfvnu
jrag bhg ntnvafg uvz.

35:21 Ohg ur frag nzonffnqbef gb uvz, fnlvat, Jung unir V gb qb jvgu
gurr, gubh xvat bs Whqnu? V pbzr abg ntnvafg gurr guvf qnl, ohg
ntnvafg gur ubhfr jurerjvgu V unir jne: sbe Tbq pbzznaqrq zr gb znxr
unfgr: sbeorne gurr sebz zrqqyvat jvgu Tbq, jub vf jvgu zr, gung ur
qrfgebl gurr abg.

35:22 Arireguryrff Wbfvnu jbhyq abg ghea uvf snpr sebz uvz, ohg
qvfthvfrq uvzfrys, gung ur zvtug svtug jvgu uvz, naq urnexrarq abg
hagb gur jbeqf bs Arpub sebz gur zbhgu bs Tbq, naq pnzr gb svtug va
gur inyyrl bs Zrtvqqb.

35:23 Naq gur nepuref fubg ng xvat Wbfvnu; naq gur xvat fnvq gb uvf
freinagf, Unir zr njnl; sbe V nz fber jbhaqrq.

35:24 Uvf freinagf gurersber gbbx uvz bhg bs gung punevbg, naq chg uvz
va gur frpbaq punevbg gung ur unq; naq gurl oebhtug uvz gb Wrehfnyrz,
naq ur qvrq, naq jnf ohevrq va bar bs gur frchypuerf bs uvf snguref.
Naq nyy Whqnu naq Wrehfnyrz zbhearq sbe Wbfvnu.

35:25 Naq Wrerzvnu ynzragrq sbe Wbfvnu: naq nyy gur fvatvat zra naq
gur fvatvat jbzra fcnxr bs Wbfvnu va gurve ynzragngvbaf gb guvf qnl,
naq znqr gurz na beqvanapr va Vfenry: naq, orubyq, gurl ner jevggra va
gur ynzragngvbaf.

35:26 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Wbfvnu, naq uvf tbbqarff, nppbeqvat
gb gung juvpu jnf jevggra va gur ynj bs gur YBEQ, 35:27 Naq uvf qrrqf,
svefg naq ynfg, orubyq, gurl ner jevggra va gur obbx bs gur xvatf bs
Vfenry naq Whqnu.

36:1 Gura gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq gbbx Wrubnunm gur fba bs Wbfvnu, naq
znqr uvz xvat va uvf sngure'f fgrnq va Wrehfnyrz.

36:2 Wrubnunm jnf gjragl naq guerr lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta,
naq ur ervtarq guerr zbaguf va Wrehfnyrz.

36:3 Naq gur xvat bs Rtlcg chg uvz qbja ng Wrehfnyrz, naq pbaqrzarq
gur ynaq va na uhaqerq gnyragf bs fvyire naq n gnyrag bs tbyq.

36:4 Naq gur xvat bs Rtlcg znqr Ryvnxvz uvf oebgure xvat bire Whqnu
naq Wrehfnyrz, naq ghearq uvf anzr gb Wrubvnxvz. Naq Arpub gbbx
Wrubnunm uvf oebgure, naq pneevrq uvz gb Rtlcg.

36:5 Wrubvnxvz jnf gjragl naq svir lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta,
naq ur ervtarq ryrira lrnef va Wrehfnyrz: naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf
rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ uvf Tbq.

36:6 Ntnvafg uvz pnzr hc Arohpunqarmmne xvat bs Onolyba, naq obhaq uvz
va srggref, gb pneel uvz gb Onolyba.

36:7 Arohpunqarmmne nyfb pneevrq bs gur irffryf bs gur ubhfr bs gur
YBEQ gb Onolyba, naq chg gurz va uvf grzcyr ng Onolyba.

36:8 Abj gur erfg bs gur npgf bs Wrubvnxvz, naq uvf nobzvangvbaf juvpu
ur qvq, naq gung juvpu jnf sbhaq va uvz, orubyq, gurl ner jevggra va
gur obbx bs gur xvatf bs Vfenry naq Whqnu: naq Wrubvnpuva uvf fba
ervtarq va uvf fgrnq.

36:9 Wrubvnpuva jnf rvtug lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta, naq ur
ervtarq guerr zbaguf naq gra qnlf va Wrehfnyrz: naq ur qvq gung juvpu
jnf rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ.

36:10 Naq jura gur lrne jnf rkcverq, xvat Arohpunqarmmne frag, naq
oebhtug uvz gb Onolyba, jvgu gur tbbqyl irffryf bs gur ubhfr bs gur
YBEQ, naq znqr Mrqrxvnu uvf oebgure xvat bire Whqnu naq Wrehfnyrz.

36:11 Mrqrxvnu jnf bar naq gjragl lrnef byq jura ur ortna gb ervta,
naq ervtarq ryrira lrnef va Wrehfnyrz.

36:12 Naq ur qvq gung juvpu jnf rivy va gur fvtug bs gur YBEQ uvf Tbq,
naq uhzoyrq abg uvzfrys orsber Wrerzvnu gur cebcurg fcrnxvat sebz gur
zbhgu bs gur YBEQ.

36:13 Naq ur nyfb eroryyrq ntnvafg xvat Arohpunqarmmne, jub unq znqr
uvz fjrne ol Tbq: ohg ur fgvssrarq uvf arpx, naq uneqrarq uvf urneg
sebz gheavat hagb gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry.

36:14 Zberbire nyy gur puvrs bs gur cevrfgf, naq gur crbcyr,
genafterffrq irel zhpu nsgre nyy gur nobzvangvbaf bs gur urngura; naq
cbyyhgrq gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ juvpu ur unq unyybjrq va Wrehfnyrz.

36:15 Naq gur YBEQ Tbq bs gurve snguref frag gb gurz ol uvf
zrffratref, evfvat hc orgvzrf, naq fraqvat; orpnhfr ur unq pbzcnffvba
ba uvf crbcyr, naq ba uvf qjryyvat cynpr: 36:16 Ohg gurl zbpxrq gur
zrffratref bs Tbq, naq qrfcvfrq uvf jbeqf, naq zvfhfrq uvf cebcurgf,
hagvy gur jengu bs gur YBEQ nebfr ntnvafg uvf crbcyr, gvyy gurer jnf
ab erzrql.

36:17 Gurersber ur oebhtug hcba gurz gur xvat bs gur Punyqrrf, jub
fyrj gurve lbhat zra jvgu gur fjbeq va gur ubhfr bs gurve fnapghnel,
naq unq ab pbzcnffvba hcba lbhat zna be znvqra, byq zna, be uvz gung
fgbbcrq sbe ntr: ur tnir gurz nyy vagb uvf unaq.

36:18 Naq nyy gur irffryf bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq, terng naq fznyy, naq
gur gernfherf bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ, naq gur gernfherf bs gur xvat,
naq bs uvf cevaprf; nyy gurfr ur oebhtug gb Onolyba.

36:19 Naq gurl oheag gur ubhfr bs Tbq, naq oenxr qbja gur jnyy bs
Wrehfnyrz, naq oheag nyy gur cnynprf gurerbs jvgu sver, naq qrfgeblrq
nyy gur tbbqyl irffryf gurerbs.

36:20 Naq gurz gung unq rfpncrq sebz gur fjbeq pneevrq ur njnl gb
Onolyba; jurer gurl jrer freinagf gb uvz naq uvf fbaf hagvy gur ervta
bs gur xvatqbz bs Crefvn: 36:21 Gb shysvy gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ ol gur
zbhgu bs Wrerzvnu, hagvy gur ynaq unq rawblrq ure fnoonguf: sbe nf
ybat nf fur ynl qrfbyngr fur xrcg fnoongu, gb shysvy guerrfpber naq
gra lrnef.

36:22 Abj va gur svefg lrne bs Plehf xvat bs Crefvn, gung gur jbeq bs
gur YBEQ fcbxra ol gur zbhgu bs Wrerzvnu zvtug or nppbzcyvfurq, gur
YBEQ fgveerq hc gur fcvevg bs Plehf xvat bs Crefvn, gung ur znqr n
cebpynzngvba guebhtubhg nyy uvf xvatqbz, naq chg vg nyfb va jevgvat,
fnlvat, 36:23 Guhf fnvgu Plehf xvat bs Crefvn, Nyy gur xvatqbzf bs gur
rnegu ungu gur YBEQ Tbq bs urnira tvira zr; naq ur ungu punetrq zr gb
ohvyq uvz na ubhfr va Wrehfnyrz, juvpu vf va Whqnu. Jub vf gurer nzbat
lbh bs nyy uvf crbcyr?  Gur YBEQ uvf Tbq or jvgu uvz, naq yrg uvz tb hc.




Rmen


1:1 Abj va gur svefg lrne bs Plehf xvat bs Crefvn, gung gur jbeq bs
gur YBEQ ol gur zbhgu bs Wrerzvnu zvtug or shysvyyrq, gur YBEQ fgveerq
hc gur fcvevg bs Plehf xvat bs Crefvn, gung ur znqr n cebpynzngvba
guebhtubhg nyy uvf xvatqbz, naq chg vg nyfb va jevgvat, fnlvat, 1:2
Guhf fnvgu Plehf xvat bs Crefvn, Gur YBEQ Tbq bs urnira ungu tvira zr
nyy gur xvatqbzf bs gur rnegu; naq ur ungu punetrq zr gb ohvyq uvz na
ubhfr ng Wrehfnyrz, juvpu vf va Whqnu.

1:3 Jub vf gurer nzbat lbh bs nyy uvf crbcyr? uvf Tbq or jvgu uvz, naq
yrg uvz tb hc gb Wrehfnyrz, juvpu vf va Whqnu, naq ohvyq gur ubhfr bs
gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, (ur vf gur Tbq,) juvpu vf va Wrehfnyrz.

1:4 Naq jubfbrire erznvargu va nal cynpr jurer ur fbwbheargu, yrg gur
zra bs uvf cynpr uryc uvz jvgu fvyire, naq jvgu tbyq, naq jvgu tbbqf,
naq jvgu ornfgf, orfvqr gur serrjvyy bssrevat sbe gur ubhfr bs Tbq
gung vf va Wrehfnyrz.

1:5 Gura ebfr hc gur puvrs bs gur snguref bs Whqnu naq Orawnzva, naq
gur cevrfgf, naq gur Yrivgrf, jvgu nyy gurz jubfr fcvevg Tbq unq
envfrq, gb tb hc gb ohvyq gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ juvpu vf va Wrehfnyrz.

1:6 Naq nyy gurl gung jrer nobhg gurz fgeratgurarq gurve unaqf jvgu
irffryf bs fvyire, jvgu tbyq, jvgu tbbqf, naq jvgu ornfgf, naq jvgu
cerpvbhf guvatf, orfvqr nyy gung jnf jvyyvatyl bssrerq.

1:7 Nyfb Plehf gur xvat oebhtug sbegu gur irffryf bs gur ubhfr bs gur
YBEQ, juvpu Arohpunqarmmne unq oebhtug sbegu bhg bs Wrehfnyrz, naq unq
chg gurz va gur ubhfr bs uvf tbqf; 1:8 Rira gubfr qvq Plehf xvat bs
Crefvn oevat sbegu ol gur unaq bs Zvguerqngu gur gernfhere, naq
ahzorerq gurz hagb Furfuonmmne, gur cevapr bs Whqnu.

1:9 Naq guvf vf gur ahzore bs gurz: guvegl punetref bs tbyq, n
gubhfnaq punetref bs fvyire, avar naq gjragl xavirf, 1:10 Guvegl
onfbaf bs tbyq, fvyire onfbaf bs n frpbaq fbeg sbhe uhaqerq naq gra,
naq bgure irffryf n gubhfnaq.

1:11 Nyy gur irffryf bs tbyq naq bs fvyire jrer svir gubhfnaq naq sbhe
uhaqerq. Nyy gurfr qvq Furfuonmmne oevat hc jvgu gurz bs gur pncgvivgl
gung jrer oebhtug hc sebz Onolyba hagb Wrehfnyrz.

2:1 Abj gurfr ner gur puvyqera bs gur cebivapr gung jrag hc bhg bs gur
pncgvivgl, bs gubfr juvpu unq orra pneevrq njnl, jubz Arohpunqarmmne
gur xvat bs Onolyba unq pneevrq njnl hagb Onolyba, naq pnzr ntnva hagb
Wrehfnyrz naq Whqnu, rirel bar hagb uvf pvgl; 2:2 Juvpu pnzr jvgu
Mrehoonory: Wrfuhn, Arurzvnu, Frenvnu, Errynvnu, Zbeqrpnv, Ovyfuna,
Zvmcne, Ovtinv, Eruhz, Onnanu. Gur ahzore bs gur zra bs gur crbcyr bs
Vfenry: 2:3 Gur puvyqera bs Cnebfu, gjb gubhfnaq na uhaqerq friragl
naq gjb.

2:4 Gur puvyqera bs Furcungvnu, guerr uhaqerq friragl naq gjb.

2:5 Gur puvyqera bs Nenu, frira uhaqerq friragl naq svir.

2:6 Gur puvyqera bs Cnunguzbno, bs gur puvyqera bs Wrfuhn naq Wbno,
gjb gubhfnaq rvtug uhaqerq naq gjryir.

2:7 Gur puvyqera bs Rynz, n gubhfnaq gjb uhaqerq svsgl naq sbhe.

2:8 Gur puvyqera bs Mnggh, avar uhaqerq sbegl naq svir.

2:9 Gur puvyqera bs Mnppnv, frira uhaqerq naq guerrfpber.

2:10 Gur puvyqera bs Onav, fvk uhaqerq sbegl naq gjb.

2:11 Gur puvyqera bs Oronv, fvk uhaqerq gjragl naq guerr.

2:12 Gur puvyqera bs Nmtnq, n gubhfnaq gjb uhaqerq gjragl naq gjb.

2:13 Gur puvyqera bs Nqbavxnz, fvk uhaqerq fvkgl naq fvk.

2:14 Gur puvyqera bs Ovtinv, gjb gubhfnaq svsgl naq fvk.

2:15 Gur puvyqera bs Nqva, sbhe uhaqerq svsgl naq sbhe.

2:16 Gur puvyqera bs Ngre bs Urmrxvnu, avargl naq rvtug.

2:17 Gur puvyqera bs Ormnv, guerr uhaqerq gjragl naq guerr.

2:18 Gur puvyqera bs Wbenu, na uhaqerq naq gjryir.

2:19 Gur puvyqera bs Unfuhz, gjb uhaqerq gjragl naq guerr.

2:20 Gur puvyqera bs Tvoone, avargl naq svir.

2:21 Gur puvyqera bs Orguyrurz, na uhaqerq gjragl naq guerr.

2:22 Gur zra bs Argbcunu, svsgl naq fvk.

2:23 Gur zra bs Nangubgu, na uhaqerq gjragl naq rvtug.

2:24 Gur puvyqera bs Nmznirgu, sbegl naq gjb.

2:25 Gur puvyqera bs Xvewngunevz, Purcuvenu, naq Orrebgu, frira
uhaqerq naq sbegl naq guerr.

2:26 Gur puvyqera bs Enznu naq Tnon, fvk uhaqerq gjragl naq bar.

2:27 Gur zra bs Zvpuznf, na uhaqerq gjragl naq gjb.

2:28 Gur zra bs Orgury naq Nv, gjb uhaqerq gjragl naq guerr.

2:29 Gur puvyqera bs Arob, svsgl naq gjb.

2:30 Gur puvyqera bs Zntovfu, na uhaqerq svsgl naq fvk.

2:31 Gur puvyqera bs gur bgure Rynz, n gubhfnaq gjb uhaqerq svsgl naq
sbhe.

2:32 Gur puvyqera bs Unevz, guerr uhaqerq naq gjragl.

2:33 Gur puvyqera bs Ybq, Unqvq, naq Bab, frira uhaqerq gjragl naq
svir.

2:34 Gur puvyqera bs Wrevpub, guerr uhaqerq sbegl naq svir.

2:35 Gur puvyqera bs Frannu, guerr gubhfnaq naq fvk uhaqerq naq
guvegl.

2:36 Gur cevrfgf: gur puvyqera bs Wrqnvnu, bs gur ubhfr bs Wrfuhn,
avar uhaqerq friragl naq guerr.

2:37 Gur puvyqera bs Vzzre, n gubhfnaq svsgl naq gjb.

2:38 Gur puvyqera bs Cnfuhe, n gubhfnaq gjb uhaqerq sbegl naq frira.

2:39 Gur puvyqera bs Unevz, n gubhfnaq naq friragrra.

2:40 Gur Yrivgrf: gur puvyqera bs Wrfuhn naq Xnqzvry, bs gur puvyqera
bs Ubqnivnu, friragl naq sbhe.

2:41 Gur fvatref: gur puvyqera bs Nfncu, na uhaqerq gjragl naq rvtug.

2:42 Gur puvyqera bs gur cbegref: gur puvyqera bs Funyyhz, gur
puvyqera bs Ngre, gur puvyqera bs Gnyzba, gur puvyqera bs Nxxho, gur
puvyqera bs Ungvgn, gur puvyqera bs Fubonv, va nyy na uhaqerq guvegl
naq avar.

2:43 Gur Arguvavzf: gur puvyqera bs Mvun, gur puvyqera bs Unfhcun, gur
puvyqera bs Gnoonbgu, 2:44 Gur puvyqera bs Xrebf, gur puvyqera bs
Fvnun, gur puvyqera bs Cnqba, 2:45 Gur puvyqera bs Yronanu, gur
puvyqera bs Untnonu, gur puvyqera bs Nxxho, 2:46 Gur puvyqera bs
Untno, gur puvyqera bs Funyznv, gur puvyqera bs Unana, 2:47 Gur
puvyqera bs Tvqqry, gur puvyqera bs Tnune, gur puvyqera bs Ernvnu,
2:48 Gur puvyqera bs Ermva, gur puvyqera bs Arxbqn, gur puvyqera bs
Tnmmnz, 2:49 Gur puvyqera bs Hmmn, gur puvyqera bs Cnfrnu, gur
puvyqera bs Orfnv, 2:50 Gur puvyqera bs Nfanu, gur puvyqera bs
Zruhavz, gur puvyqera bs Arcuhfvz, 2:51 Gur puvyqera bs Onxohx, gur
puvyqera bs Unxhcun, gur puvyqera bs Uneuhe, 2:52 Gur puvyqera bs
Onmyhgu, gur puvyqera bs Zruvqn, gur puvyqera bs Unefun, 2:53 Gur
puvyqera bs Onexbf, gur puvyqera bs Fvfren, gur puvyqera bs Gunznu,
2:54 Gur puvyqera bs Armvnu, gur puvyqera bs Ungvcun.

2:55 Gur puvyqera bs Fbybzba'f freinagf: gur puvyqera bs Fbgnv, gur
puvyqera bs Fbcurergu, gur puvyqera bs Crehqn, 2:56 Gur puvyqera bs
Wnnynu, gur puvyqera bs Qnexba, gur puvyqera bs Tvqqry, 2:57 Gur
puvyqera bs Furcungvnu, gur puvyqera bs Unggvy, gur puvyqera bs
Cbpurergu bs Mronvz, gur puvyqera bs Nzv.

2:58 Nyy gur Arguvavzf, naq gur puvyqera bs Fbybzba'f freinagf, jrer
guerr uhaqerq avargl naq gjb.

2:59 Naq gurfr jrer gurl juvpu jrag hc sebz Gryzrynu, Gryunefn,
Pureho, Nqqna, naq Vzzre: ohg gurl pbhyq abg furj gurve sngure'f
ubhfr, naq gurve frrq, jurgure gurl jrer bs Vfenry: 2:60 Gur puvyqera
bs Qrynvnu, gur puvyqera bs Gbovnu, gur puvyqera bs Arxbqn, fvk
uhaqerq svsgl naq gjb.

2:61 Naq bs gur puvyqera bs gur cevrfgf: gur puvyqera bs Unonvnu, gur
puvyqera bs Xbm, gur puvyqera bs Onemvyynv; juvpu gbbx n jvsr bs gur
qnhtugref bs Onemvyynv gur Tvyrnqvgr, naq jnf pnyyrq nsgre gurve anzr:
2:62 Gurfr fbhtug gurve ertvfgre nzbat gubfr gung jrer erpxbarq ol
trarnybtl, ohg gurl jrer abg sbhaq: gurersber jrer gurl, nf cbyyhgrq,
chg sebz gur cevrfgubbq.

2:63 Naq gur Gvefungun fnvq hagb gurz, gung gurl fubhyq abg rng bs gur
zbfg ubyl guvatf, gvyy gurer fgbbq hc n cevrfg jvgu Hevz naq jvgu
Guhzzvz.

2:64 Gur jubyr pbatertngvba gbtrgure jnf sbegl naq gjb gubhfnaq guerr
uhaqerq naq guerrfpber, 2:65 Orfvqr gurve freinagf naq gurve znvqf, bs
jubz gurer jrer frira gubhfnaq guerr uhaqerq guvegl naq frira: naq
gurer jrer nzbat gurz gjb uhaqerq fvatvat zra naq fvatvat jbzra.

2:66 Gurve ubefrf jrer frira uhaqerq guvegl naq fvk; gurve zhyrf, gjb
uhaqerq sbegl naq svir; 2:67 Gurve pnzryf, sbhe uhaqerq guvegl naq
svir; gurve nffrf, fvk gubhfnaq frira uhaqerq naq gjragl.

2:68 Naq fbzr bs gur puvrs bs gur snguref, jura gurl pnzr gb gur ubhfr
bs gur YBEQ juvpu vf ng Wrehfnyrz, bssrerq serryl sbe gur ubhfr bs Tbq
gb frg vg hc va uvf cynpr: 2:69 Gurl tnir nsgre gurve novyvgl hagb gur
gernfher bs gur jbex guerrfpber naq bar gubhfnaq qenzf bs tbyq, naq
svir gubhfnaq cbhaq bs fvyire, naq bar uhaqerq cevrfgf' tnezragf.

2:70 Fb gur cevrfgf, naq gur Yrivgrf, naq fbzr bs gur crbcyr, naq gur
fvatref, naq gur cbegref, naq gur Arguvavzf, qjryg va gurve pvgvrf,
naq nyy Vfenry va gurve pvgvrf.

3:1 Naq jura gur friragu zbagu jnf pbzr, naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry
jrer va gur pvgvrf, gur crbcyr tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure nf bar zna
gb Wrehfnyrz.

3:2 Gura fgbbq hc Wrfuhn gur fba bs Wbmnqnx, naq uvf oerguera gur
cevrfgf, naq Mrehoonory gur fba bs Furnygvry, naq uvf oerguera, naq
ohvyqrq gur nygne bs gur Tbq bs Vfenry, gb bssre oheag bssrevatf
gurerba, nf vg vf jevggra va gur ynj bs Zbfrf gur zna bs Tbq.

3:3 Naq gurl frg gur nygne hcba uvf onfrf; sbe srne jnf hcba gurz
orpnhfr bs gur crbcyr bs gubfr pbhagevrf: naq gurl bssrerq oheag
bssrevatf gurerba hagb gur YBEQ, rira oheag bssrevatf zbeavat naq
riravat.

3:4 Gurl xrcg nyfb gur srnfg bs gnoreanpyrf, nf vg vf jevggra, naq
bssrerq gur qnvyl oheag bssrevatf ol ahzore, nppbeqvat gb gur phfgbz,
nf gur qhgl bs rirel qnl erdhverq; 3:5 Naq nsgrejneq bssrerq gur
pbagvahny oheag bssrevat, obgu bs gur arj zbbaf, naq bs nyy gur frg
srnfgf bs gur YBEQ gung jrer pbafrpengrq, naq bs rirel bar gung
jvyyvatyl bssrerq n serrjvyy bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ.

3:6 Sebz gur svefg qnl bs gur friragu zbagu ortna gurl gb bssre oheag
bssrevatf hagb gur YBEQ. Ohg gur sbhaqngvba bs gur grzcyr bs gur YBEQ
jnf abg lrg ynvq.

3:7 Gurl tnir zbarl nyfb hagb gur znfbaf, naq gb gur pnecragref; naq
zrng, naq qevax, naq bvy, hagb gurz bs Mvqba, naq gb gurz bs Gler, gb
oevat prqne gerrf sebz Yronaba gb gur frn bs Wbccn, nppbeqvat gb gur
tenag gung gurl unq bs Plehf xvat bs Crefvn.

3:8 Abj va gur frpbaq lrne bs gurve pbzvat hagb gur ubhfr bs Tbq ng
Wrehfnyrz, va gur frpbaq zbagu, ortna Mrehoonory gur fba bs Furnygvry,
naq Wrfuhn gur fba bs Wbmnqnx, naq gur erzanag bs gurve oerguera gur
cevrfgf naq gur Yrivgrf, naq nyy gurl gung jrer pbzr bhg bs gur
pncgvivgl hagb Wrehfnyrz; naq nccbvagrq gur Yrivgrf, sebz gjragl lrnef
byq naq hcjneq, gb frg sbejneq gur jbex bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

3:9 Gura fgbbq Wrfuhn jvgu uvf fbaf naq uvf oerguera, Xnqzvry naq uvf
fbaf, gur fbaf bs Whqnu, gbtrgure, gb frg sbejneq gur jbexzra va gur
ubhfr bs Tbq: gur fbaf bs Uranqnq, jvgu gurve fbaf naq gurve oerguera
gur Yrivgrf.

3:10 Naq jura gur ohvyqref ynvq gur sbhaqngvba bs gur grzcyr bs gur
YBEQ, gurl frg gur cevrfgf va gurve nccnery jvgu gehzcrgf, naq gur
Yrivgrf gur fbaf bs Nfncu jvgu plzonyf, gb cenvfr gur YBEQ, nsgre gur
beqvanapr bs Qnivq xvat bs Vfenry.

3:11 Naq gurl fnat gbtrgure ol pbhefr va cenvfvat naq tvivat gunaxf
hagb gur YBEQ; orpnhfr ur vf tbbq, sbe uvf zrepl raqhergu sbe rire
gbjneq Vfenry.

Naq nyy gur crbcyr fubhgrq jvgu n terng fubhg, jura gurl cenvfrq gur
YBEQ, orpnhfr gur sbhaqngvba bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ jnf ynvq.

3:12 Ohg znal bs gur cevrfgf naq Yrivgrf naq puvrs bs gur snguref, jub
jrer napvrag zra, gung unq frra gur svefg ubhfr, jura gur sbhaqngvba
bs guvf ubhfr jnf ynvq orsber gurve rlrf, jrcg jvgu n ybhq ibvpr; naq
znal fubhgrq nybhq sbe wbl: 3:13 Fb gung gur crbcyr pbhyq abg qvfprea
gur abvfr bs gur fubhg bs wbl sebz gur abvfr bs gur jrrcvat bs gur
crbcyr: sbe gur crbcyr fubhgrq jvgu n ybhq fubhg, naq gur abvfr jnf
urneq nsne bss.

4:1 Abj jura gur nqirefnevrf bs Whqnu naq Orawnzva urneq gung gur
puvyqera bs gur pncgvivgl ohvyqrq gur grzcyr hagb gur YBEQ Tbq bs
Vfenry; 4:2 Gura gurl pnzr gb Mrehoonory, naq gb gur puvrs bs gur
snguref, naq fnvq hagb gurz, Yrg hf ohvyq jvgu lbh: sbe jr frrx lbhe
Tbq, nf lr qb; naq jr qb fnpevsvpr hagb uvz fvapr gur qnlf bs
Rfneunqqba xvat bs Nffhe, juvpu oebhtug hf hc uvgure.

4:3 Ohg Mrehoonory, naq Wrfuhn, naq gur erfg bs gur puvrs bs gur
snguref bs Vfenry, fnvq hagb gurz, Lr unir abguvat gb qb jvgu hf gb
ohvyq na ubhfr hagb bhe Tbq; ohg jr bhefryirf gbtrgure jvyy ohvyq hagb
gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, nf xvat Plehf gur xvat bs Crefvn ungu
pbzznaqrq hf.

4:4 Gura gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq jrnxrarq gur unaqf bs gur crbcyr bs
Whqnu, naq gebhoyrq gurz va ohvyqvat, 4:5 Naq uverq pbhafryybef
ntnvafg gurz, gb sehfgengr gurve checbfr, nyy gur qnlf bs Plehf xvat
bs Crefvn, rira hagvy gur ervta bs Qnevhf xvat bs Crefvn.

4:6 Naq va gur ervta bs Nunfhrehf, va gur ortvaavat bs uvf ervta,
jebgr gurl hagb uvz na npphfngvba ntnvafg gur vaunovgnagf bs Whqnu naq
Wrehfnyrz.

4:7 Naq va gur qnlf bs Negnkrekrf jebgr Ovfuynz, Zvguerqngu, Gnorry,
naq gur erfg bs gurve pbzcnavbaf, hagb Negnkrekrf xvat bs Crefvn; naq
gur jevgvat bs gur yrggre jnf jevggra va gur Flevna gbathr, naq
vagrecergrq va gur Flevna gbathr.

4:8 Eruhz gur punapryybe naq Fuvzfunv gur fpevor jebgr n yrggre
ntnvafg Wrehfnyrz gb Negnkrekrf gur xvat va guvf fbeg: 4:9 Gura jebgr
Eruhz gur punapryybe, naq Fuvzfunv gur fpevor, naq gur erfg bs gurve
pbzcnavbaf; gur Qvanvgrf, gur Ncunefngupuvgrf, gur Gnecryvgrf, gur
Ncunefvgrf, gur Nepurivgrf, gur Onolybavnaf, gur Fhfnapuvgrf, gur
Qrunivgrf, naq gur Rynzvgrf, 4:10 Naq gur erfg bs gur angvbaf jubz gur
terng naq aboyr Nfanccre oebhtug bire, naq frg va gur pvgvrf bs
Fnznevn, naq gur erfg gung ner ba guvf fvqr gur evire, naq ng fhpu n
gvzr.

4:11 Guvf vf gur pbcl bs gur yrggre gung gurl frag hagb uvz, rira hagb
Negnkrekrf gur xvat; Gul freinagf gur zra ba guvf fvqr gur evire, naq
ng fhpu n gvzr.

4:12 Or vg xabja hagb gur xvat, gung gur Wrjf juvpu pnzr hc sebz gurr
gb hf ner pbzr hagb Wrehfnyrz, ohvyqvat gur eroryyvbhf naq gur onq
pvgl, naq unir frg hc gur jnyyf gurerbs, naq wbvarq gur sbhaqngvbaf.

4:13 Or vg xabja abj hagb gur xvat, gung, vs guvf pvgl or ohvyqrq, naq
gur jnyyf frg hc ntnva, gura jvyy gurl abg cnl gbyy, gevohgr, naq
phfgbz, naq fb gubh funyg raqnzntr gur erirahr bs gur xvatf.

4:14 Abj orpnhfr jr unir znvagranapr sebz gur xvat'f cnynpr, naq vg
jnf abg zrrg sbe hf gb frr gur xvat'f qvfubabhe, gurersber unir jr
frag naq pregvsvrq gur xvat; 4:15 Gung frnepu znl or znqr va gur obbx
bs gur erpbeqf bs gul snguref: fb funyg gubh svaq va gur obbx bs gur
erpbeqf, naq xabj gung guvf pvgl vf n eroryyvbhf pvgl, naq uhegshy
hagb xvatf naq cebivaprf, naq gung gurl unir zbirq frqvgvba jvguva gur
fnzr bs byq gvzr: sbe juvpu pnhfr jnf guvf pvgl qrfgeblrq.

4:16 Jr pregvsl gur xvat gung, vs guvf pvgl or ohvyqrq ntnva, naq gur
jnyyf gurerbs frg hc, ol guvf zrnaf gubh funyg unir ab cbegvba ba guvf
fvqr gur evire.

4:17 Gura frag gur xvat na nafjre hagb Eruhz gur punapryybe, naq gb
Fuvzfunv gur fpevor, naq gb gur erfg bs gurve pbzcnavbaf gung qjryy va
Fnznevn, naq hagb gur erfg orlbaq gur evire, Crnpr, naq ng fhpu n
gvzr.

4:18 Gur yrggre juvpu lr frag hagb hf ungu orra cynvayl ernq orsber
zr.

4:19 Naq V pbzznaqrq, naq frnepu ungu orra znqr, naq vg vf sbhaq gung
guvf pvgl bs byq gvzr ungu znqr vafheerpgvba ntnvafg xvatf, naq gung
eroryyvba naq frqvgvba unir orra znqr gurerva.

4:20 Gurer unir orra zvtugl xvatf nyfb bire Wrehfnyrz, juvpu unir
ehyrq bire nyy pbhagevrf orlbaq gur evire; naq gbyy, gevohgr, naq
phfgbz, jnf cnvq hagb gurz.

4:21 Tvir lr abj pbzznaqzrag gb pnhfr gurfr zra gb prnfr, naq gung
guvf pvgl or abg ohvyqrq, hagvy nabgure pbzznaqzrag funyy or tvira
sebz zr.

4:22 Gnxr urrq abj gung lr snvy abg gb qb guvf: jul fubhyq qnzntr tebj
gb gur uheg bs gur xvatf?  4:23 Abj jura gur pbcl bs xvat Negnkrekrf'
yrggre jnf ernq orsber Eruhz, naq Fuvzfunv gur fpevor, naq gurve
pbzcnavbaf, gurl jrag hc va unfgr gb Wrehfnyrz hagb gur Wrjf, naq znqr
gurz gb prnfr ol sbepr naq cbjre.

4:24 Gura prnfrq gur jbex bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq juvpu vf ng Wrehfnyrz.
Fb vg prnfrq hagb gur frpbaq lrne bs gur ervta bs Qnevhf xvat bs
Crefvn.

5:1 Gura gur cebcurgf, Unttnv gur cebcurg, naq Mrpunevnu gur fba bs
Vqqb, cebcurfvrq hagb gur Wrjf gung jrer va Whqnu naq Wrehfnyrz va gur
anzr bs gur Tbq bs Vfenry, rira hagb gurz.

5:2 Gura ebfr hc Mrehoonory gur fba bs Furnygvry, naq Wrfuhn gur fba
bs Wbmnqnx, naq ortna gb ohvyq gur ubhfr bs Tbq juvpu vf ng Wrehfnyrz:
naq jvgu gurz jrer gur cebcurgf bs Tbq urycvat gurz.

5:3 Ng gur fnzr gvzr pnzr gb gurz Gnganv, tbireabe ba guvf fvqr gur
evire, naq Furguneobmanv naq gurve pbzcnavbaf, naq fnvq guhf hagb
gurz, Jub ungu pbzznaqrq lbh gb ohvyq guvf ubhfr, naq gb znxr hc guvf
jnyy?  5:4 Gura fnvq jr hagb gurz nsgre guvf znaare, Jung ner gur
anzrf bs gur zra gung znxr guvf ohvyqvat?  5:5 Ohg gur rlr bs gurve
Tbq jnf hcba gur ryqref bs gur Wrjf, gung gurl pbhyq abg pnhfr gurz gb
prnfr, gvyy gur znggre pnzr gb Qnevhf: naq gura gurl erghearq nafjre
ol yrggre pbapreavat guvf znggre.

5:6 Gur pbcl bs gur yrggre gung Gnganv, tbireabe ba guvf fvqr gur
evire, naq Furguneobmanv naq uvf pbzcnavbaf gur Ncunefnpuvgrf, juvpu
jrer ba guvf fvqr gur evire, frag hagb Qnevhf gur xvat: 5:7 Gurl frag
n yrggre hagb uvz, jurerva jnf jevggra guhf; Hagb Qnevhf gur xvat, nyy
crnpr.

5:8 Or vg xabja hagb gur xvat, gung jr jrag vagb gur cebivapr bs
Whqrn, gb gur ubhfr bs gur terng Tbq, juvpu vf ohvyqrq jvgu terng
fgbarf, naq gvzore vf ynvq va gur jnyyf, naq guvf jbex tbrgu snfg ba,
naq cebfcrergu va gurve unaqf.

5:9 Gura nfxrq jr gubfr ryqref, naq fnvq hagb gurz guhf, Jub pbzznaqrq
lbh gb ohvyq guvf ubhfr, naq gb znxr hc gurfr jnyyf?  5:10 Jr nfxrq
gurve anzrf nyfb, gb pregvsl gurr, gung jr zvtug jevgr gur anzrf bs
gur zra gung jrer gur puvrs bs gurz.

5:11 Naq guhf gurl erghearq hf nafjre, fnlvat, Jr ner gur freinagf bs
gur Tbq bs urnira naq rnegu, naq ohvyq gur ubhfr gung jnf ohvyqrq
gurfr znal lrnef ntb, juvpu n terng xvat bs Vfenry ohvyqrq naq frg hc.

5:12 Ohg nsgre gung bhe snguref unq cebibxrq gur Tbq bs urnira hagb
jengu, ur tnir gurz vagb gur unaq bs Arohpunqarmmne gur xvat bs
Onolyba, gur Punyqrna, jub qrfgeblrq guvf ubhfr, naq pneevrq gur
crbcyr njnl vagb Onolyba.

5:13 Ohg va gur svefg lrne bs Plehf gur xvat bs Onolyba gur fnzr xvat
Plehf znqr n qrperr gb ohvyq guvf ubhfr bs Tbq.

5:14 Naq gur irffryf nyfb bs tbyq naq fvyire bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq,
juvpu Arohpunqarmmne gbbx bhg bs gur grzcyr gung jnf va Wrehfnyrz, naq
oebhtug gurz vagb gur grzcyr bs Onolyba, gubfr qvq Plehf gur xvat gnxr
bhg bs gur grzcyr bs Onolyba, naq gurl jrer qryvirerq hagb bar, jubfr
anzr jnf Furfuonmmne, jubz ur unq znqr tbireabe; 5:15 Naq fnvq hagb
uvz, Gnxr gurfr irffryf, tb, pneel gurz vagb gur grzcyr gung vf va
Wrehfnyrz, naq yrg gur ubhfr bs Tbq or ohvyqrq va uvf cynpr.

5:16 Gura pnzr gur fnzr Furfuonmmne, naq ynvq gur sbhaqngvba bs gur
ubhfr bs Tbq juvpu vf va Wrehfnyrz: naq fvapr gung gvzr rira hagvy abj
ungu vg orra va ohvyqvat, naq lrg vg vf abg svavfurq.

5:17 Abj gurersber, vs vg frrz tbbq gb gur xvat, yrg gurer or frnepu
znqr va gur xvat'f gernfher ubhfr, juvpu vf gurer ng Onolyba, jurgure
vg or fb, gung n qrperr jnf znqr bs Plehf gur xvat gb ohvyq guvf ubhfr
bs Tbq ng Wrehfnyrz, naq yrg gur xvat fraq uvf cyrnfher gb hf
pbapreavat guvf znggre.

6:1 Gura Qnevhf gur xvat znqr n qrperr, naq frnepu jnf znqr va gur
ubhfr bs gur ebyyf, jurer gur gernfherf jrer ynvq hc va Onolyba.

6:2 Naq gurer jnf sbhaq ng Npuzrgun, va gur cnynpr gung vf va gur
cebivapr bs gur Zrqrf, n ebyy, naq gurerva jnf n erpbeq guhf jevggra:
6:3 Va gur svefg lrne bs Plehf gur xvat gur fnzr Plehf gur xvat znqr n
qrperr pbapreavat gur ubhfr bs Tbq ng Wrehfnyrz, Yrg gur ubhfr or
ohvyqrq, gur cynpr jurer gurl bssrerq fnpevsvprf, naq yrg gur
sbhaqngvbaf gurerbs or fgebatyl ynvq; gur urvtug gurerbs guerrfpber
phovgf, naq gur oernqgu gurerbs guerrfpber phovgf; 6:4 Jvgu guerr ebjf
bs terng fgbarf, naq n ebj bs arj gvzore: naq yrg gur rkcrafrf or
tvira bhg bs gur xvat'f ubhfr: 6:5 Naq nyfb yrg gur tbyqra naq fvyire
irffryf bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq, juvpu Arohpunqarmmne gbbx sbegu bhg bs
gur grzcyr juvpu vf ng Wrehfnyrz, naq oebhtug hagb Onolyba, or
erfgberq, naq oebhtug ntnva hagb gur grzcyr juvpu vf ng Wrehfnyrz,
rirel bar gb uvf cynpr, naq cynpr gurz va gur ubhfr bs Tbq.

6:6 Abj gurersber, Gnganv, tbireabe orlbaq gur evire, Furguneobmanv,
naq lbhe pbzcnavbaf gur Ncunefnpuvgrf, juvpu ner orlbaq gur evire, or
lr sne sebz gurapr: 6:7 Yrg gur jbex bs guvf ubhfr bs Tbq nybar; yrg
gur tbireabe bs gur Wrjf naq gur ryqref bs gur Wrjf ohvyq guvf ubhfr
bs Tbq va uvf cynpr.

6:8 Zberbire V znxr n qrperr jung lr funyy qb gb gur ryqref bs gurfr
Wrjf sbe gur ohvyqvat bs guvf ubhfr bs Tbq: gung bs gur xvat'f tbbqf,
rira bs gur gevohgr orlbaq gur evire, sbegujvgu rkcrafrf or tvira hagb
gurfr zra, gung gurl or abg uvaqrerq.

6:9 Naq gung juvpu gurl unir arrq bs, obgu lbhat ohyybpxf, naq enzf,
naq ynzof, sbe gur oheag bssrevatf bs gur Tbq bs urnira, jurng, fnyg,
jvar, naq bvy, nppbeqvat gb gur nccbvagzrag bs gur cevrfgf juvpu ner
ng Wrehfnyrz, yrg vg or tvira gurz qnl ol qnl jvgubhg snvy: 6:10 Gung
gurl znl bssre fnpevsvprf bs fjrrg fnibhef hagb gur Tbq bs urnira, naq
cenl sbe gur yvsr bs gur xvat, naq bs uvf fbaf.

6:11 Nyfb V unir znqr n qrperr, gung jubfbrire funyy nygre guvf jbeq,
yrg gvzore or chyyrq qbja sebz uvf ubhfr, naq orvat frg hc, yrg uvz or
unatrq gurerba; naq yrg uvf ubhfr or znqr n qhatuvyy sbe guvf.

6:12 Naq gur Tbq gung ungu pnhfrq uvf anzr gb qjryy gurer qrfgebl nyy
xvatf naq crbcyr, gung funyy chg gb gurve unaq gb nygre naq gb qrfgebl
guvf ubhfr bs Tbq juvpu vf ng Wrehfnyrz. V Qnevhf unir znqr n qrperr;
yrg vg or qbar jvgu fcrrq.

6:13 Gura Gnganv, tbireabe ba guvf fvqr gur evire, Furguneobmanv, naq
gurve pbzcnavbaf, nppbeqvat gb gung juvpu Qnevhf gur xvat unq frag, fb
gurl qvq fcrrqvyl.

6:14 Naq gur ryqref bs gur Wrjf ohvyqrq, naq gurl cebfcrerq guebhtu
gur cebcurflvat bs Unttnv gur cebcurg naq Mrpunevnu gur fba bs Vqqb.
Naq gurl ohvyqrq, naq svavfurq vg, nppbeqvat gb gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur
Tbq bs Vfenry, naq nppbeqvat gb gur pbzznaqzrag bs Plehf, naq Qnevhf,
naq Negnkrekrf xvat bs Crefvn.

6:15 Naq guvf ubhfr jnf svavfurq ba gur guveq qnl bs gur zbagu Nqne,
juvpu jnf va gur fvkgu lrne bs gur ervta bs Qnevhf gur xvat.

6:16 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, gur cevrfgf, naq gur Yrivgrf, naq gur
erfg bs gur puvyqera bs gur pncgvivgl, xrcg gur qrqvpngvba bs guvf
ubhfr bs Tbq jvgu wbl.

6:17 Naq bssrerq ng gur qrqvpngvba bs guvf ubhfr bs Tbq na uhaqerq
ohyybpxf, gjb uhaqerq enzf, sbhe uhaqerq ynzof; naq sbe n fva bssrevat
sbe nyy Vfenry, gjryir ur tbngf, nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs gur gevorf
bs Vfenry.

6:18 Naq gurl frg gur cevrfgf va gurve qvivfvbaf, naq gur Yrivgrf va
gurve pbhefrf, sbe gur freivpr bs Tbq, juvpu vf ng Wrehfnyrz; nf vg vf
jevggra va gur obbx bs Zbfrf.

6:19 Naq gur puvyqera bs gur pncgvivgl xrcg gur cnffbire hcba gur
sbhegrragu qnl bs gur svefg zbagu.

6:20 Sbe gur cevrfgf naq gur Yrivgrf jrer chevsvrq gbtrgure, nyy bs
gurz jrer cher, naq xvyyrq gur cnffbire sbe nyy gur puvyqera bs gur
pncgvivgl, naq sbe gurve oerguera gur cevrfgf, naq sbe gurzfryirf.

6:21 Naq gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, juvpu jrer pbzr ntnva bhg bs
pncgvivgl, naq nyy fhpu nf unq frcnengrq gurzfryirf hagb gurz sebz gur
svyguvarff bs gur urngura bs gur ynaq, gb frrx gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry,
qvq rng, 6:22 Naq xrcg gur srnfg bs hayrnirarq oernq frira qnlf jvgu
wbl: sbe gur YBEQ unq znqr gurz wblshy, naq ghearq gur urneg bs gur
xvat bs Nfflevn hagb gurz, gb fgeratgura gurve unaqf va gur jbex bs
gur ubhfr bs Tbq, gur Tbq bs Vfenry.

7:1 Abj nsgre gurfr guvatf, va gur ervta bs Negnkrekrf xvat bs Crefvn,
Rmen gur fba bs Frenvnu, gur fba bs Nmnevnu, gur fba bs Uvyxvnu, 7:2
Gur fba bs Funyyhz, gur fba bs Mnqbx, gur fba bs Nuvgho, 7:3 Gur fba
bs Nznevnu, gur fba bs Nmnevnu, gur fba bs Zrenvbgu, 7:4 Gur fba bs
Mrenuvnu, gur fba bs Hmmv, gur fba bs Ohxxv, 7:5 Gur fba bs Novfuhn,
gur fba bs Cuvarunf, gur fba bs Ryrnmne, gur fba bs Nneba gur puvrs
cevrfg: 7:6 Guvf Rmen jrag hc sebz Onolyba; naq ur jnf n ernql fpevor
va gur ynj bs Zbfrf, juvpu gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry unq tvira: naq gur
xvat tenagrq uvz nyy uvf erdhrfg, nppbeqvat gb gur unaq bs gur YBEQ
uvf Tbq hcba uvz.

7:7 Naq gurer jrag hc fbzr bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry, naq bs gur
cevrfgf, naq gur Yrivgrf, naq gur fvatref, naq gur cbegref, naq gur
Arguvavzf, hagb Wrehfnyrz, va gur friragu lrne bs Negnkrekrf gur xvat.

7:8 Naq ur pnzr gb Wrehfnyrz va gur svsgu zbagu, juvpu jnf va gur
friragu lrne bs gur xvat.

7:9 Sbe hcba gur svefg qnl bs gur svefg zbagu ortna ur gb tb hc sebz
Onolyba, naq ba gur svefg qnl bs gur svsgu zbagu pnzr ur gb Wrehfnyrz,
nppbeqvat gb gur tbbq unaq bs uvf Tbq hcba uvz.

7:10 Sbe Rmen unq cercnerq uvf urneg gb frrx gur ynj bs gur YBEQ, naq
gb qb vg, naq gb grnpu va Vfenry fgnghgrf naq whqtzragf.

7:11 Abj guvf vf gur pbcl bs gur yrggre gung gur xvat Negnkrekrf tnir
hagb Rmen gur cevrfg, gur fpevor, rira n fpevor bs gur jbeqf bs gur
pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ, naq bs uvf fgnghgrf gb Vfenry.

7:12 Negnkrekrf, xvat bs xvatf, hagb Rmen gur cevrfg, n fpevor bs gur
ynj bs gur Tbq bs urnira, cresrpg crnpr, naq ng fhpu n gvzr.

7:13 V znxr n qrperr, gung nyy gurl bs gur crbcyr bs Vfenry, naq bs
uvf cevrfgf naq Yrivgrf, va zl ernyz, juvpu ner zvaqrq bs gurve bja
serrjvyy gb tb hc gb Wrehfnyrz, tb jvgu gurr.

7:14 Sbenfzhpu nf gubh neg frag bs gur xvat, naq bs uvf frira
pbhafryybef, gb radhver pbapreavat Whqnu naq Wrehfnyrz, nppbeqvat gb
gur ynj bs gul Tbq juvpu vf va guvar unaq; 7:15 Naq gb pneel gur
fvyire naq tbyq, juvpu gur xvat naq uvf pbhafryybef unir serryl
bssrerq hagb gur Tbq bs Vfenry, jubfr unovgngvba vf va Wrehfnyrz, 7:16
Naq nyy gur fvyire naq tbyq gung gubh pnafg svaq va nyy gur cebivapr
bs Onolyba, jvgu gur serrjvyy bssrevat bs gur crbcyr, naq bs gur
cevrfgf, bssrevat jvyyvatyl sbe gur ubhfr bs gurve Tbq juvpu vf va
Wrehfnyrz: 7:17 Gung gubh znlrfg ohl fcrrqvyl jvgu guvf zbarl
ohyybpxf, enzf, ynzof, jvgu gurve zrng bssrevatf naq gurve qevax
bssrevatf, naq bssre gurz hcba gur nygne bs gur ubhfr bs lbhe Tbq
juvpu vf va Wrehfnyrz.

7:18 Naq jungfbrire funyy frrz tbbq gb gurr, naq gb gul oerguera, gb
qb jvgu gur erfg bs gur fvyire naq gur tbyq, gung qb nsgre gur jvyy bs
lbhe Tbq.

7:19 Gur irffryf nyfb gung ner tvira gurr sbe gur freivpr bs gur ubhfr
bs gul Tbq, gubfr qryvire gubh orsber gur Tbq bs Wrehfnyrz.

7:20 Naq jungfbrire zber funyy or arrqshy sbe gur ubhfr bs gul Tbq,
juvpu gubh funyg unir bppnfvba gb orfgbj, orfgbj vg bhg bs gur xvat'f
gernfher ubhfr.

7:21 Naq V, rira V Negnkrekrf gur xvat, qb znxr n qrperr gb nyy gur
gernfheref juvpu ner orlbaq gur evire, gung jungfbrire Rmen gur
cevrfg, gur fpevor bs gur ynj bs gur Tbq bs urnira, funyy erdhver bs
lbh, vg or qbar fcrrqvyl, 7:22 Hagb na uhaqerq gnyragf bs fvyire, naq
gb na uhaqerq zrnfherf bs jurng, naq gb na uhaqerq onguf bs jvar, naq
gb na uhaqerq onguf bs bvy, naq fnyg jvgubhg cerfpevovat ubj zhpu.

7:23 Jungfbrire vf pbzznaqrq ol gur Tbq bs urnira, yrg vg or
qvyvtragyl qbar sbe gur ubhfr bs gur Tbq bs urnira: sbe jul fubhyq
gurer or jengu ntnvafg gur ernyz bs gur xvat naq uvf fbaf?  7:24 Nyfb
jr pregvsl lbh, gung gbhpuvat nal bs gur cevrfgf naq Yrivgrf, fvatref,
cbegref, Arguvavzf, be zvavfgref bs guvf ubhfr bs Tbq, vg funyy abg or
ynjshy gb vzcbfr gbyy, gevohgr, be phfgbz, hcba gurz.

7:25 Naq gubh, Rmen, nsgre gur jvfqbz bs gul Tbq, gung vf va guvar
unaq, frg zntvfgengrf naq whqtrf, juvpu znl whqtr nyy gur crbcyr gung
ner orlbaq gur evire, nyy fhpu nf xabj gur ynjf bs gul Tbq; naq grnpu
lr gurz gung xabj gurz abg.

7:26 Naq jubfbrire jvyy abg qb gur ynj bs gul Tbq, naq gur ynj bs gur
xvat, yrg whqtzrag or rkrphgrq fcrrqvyl hcba uvz, jurgure vg or hagb
qrngu, be gb onavfuzrag, be gb pbasvfpngvba bs tbbqf, be gb
vzcevfbazrag.

7:27 Oyrffrq or gur YBEQ Tbq bs bhe snguref, juvpu ungu chg fhpu n
guvat nf guvf va gur xvat'f urneg, gb ornhgvsl gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ
juvpu vf va Wrehfnyrz: 7:28 Naq ungu rkgraqrq zrepl hagb zr orsber gur
xvat, naq uvf pbhafryybef, naq orsber nyy gur xvat'f zvtugl cevaprf.
Naq V jnf fgeratgurarq nf gur unaq bs gur YBEQ zl Tbq jnf hcba zr, naq
V tngurerq gbtrgure bhg bs Vfenry puvrs zra gb tb hc jvgu zr.

8:1 Gurfr ner abj gur puvrs bs gurve snguref, naq guvf vf gur
trarnybtl bs gurz gung jrag hc jvgu zr sebz Onolyba, va gur ervta bs
Negnkrekrf gur xvat.

8:2 Bs gur fbaf bs Cuvarunf; Trefubz: bs gur fbaf bs Vgunzne; Qnavry:
bs gur fbaf bs Qnivq; Ungghfu.

8:3 Bs gur fbaf bs Furpunavnu, bs gur fbaf bs Cunebfu; Mrpunevnu: naq
jvgu uvz jrer erpxbarq ol trarnybtl bs gur znyrf na uhaqerq naq svsgl.

8:4 Bs gur fbaf bs Cnunguzbno; Ryvubranv gur fba bs Mrenuvnu, naq jvgu
uvz gjb uhaqerq znyrf.

8:5 Bs gur fbaf bs Furpunavnu; gur fba bs Wnunmvry, naq jvgu uvz guerr
uhaqerq znyrf.

8:6 Bs gur fbaf nyfb bs Nqva; Rorq gur fba bs Wbanguna, naq jvgu uvz
svsgl znyrf.

8:7 Naq bs gur fbaf bs Rynz; Wrfunvnu gur fba bs Ngunyvnu, naq jvgu
uvz friragl znyrf.

8:8 Naq bs gur fbaf bs Furcungvnu; Mronqvnu gur fba bs Zvpunry, naq
jvgu uvz sbhefpber znyrf.

8:9 Bs gur fbaf bs Wbno; Bonqvnu gur fba bs Wruvry, naq jvgu uvz gjb
uhaqerq naq rvtugrra znyrf.

8:10 Naq bs gur fbaf bs Furybzvgu; gur fba bs Wbfvcuvnu, naq jvgu uvz
na uhaqerq naq guerrfpber znyrf.

8:11 Naq bs gur fbaf bs Oronv; Mrpunevnu gur fba bs Oronv, naq jvgu
uvz gjragl naq rvtug znyrf.

8:12 Naq bs gur fbaf bs Nmtnq; Wbunana gur fba bs Unxxngna, naq jvgu
uvz na uhaqerq naq gra znyrf.

8:13 Naq bs gur ynfg fbaf bs Nqbavxnz, jubfr anzrf ner gurfr,
Ryvcuryrg, Wrvry, naq Furznvnu, naq jvgu gurz guerrfpber znyrf.

8:14 Bs gur fbaf nyfb bs Ovtinv; Hgunv, naq Mnoohq, naq jvgu gurz
friragl znyrf.

8:15 Naq V tngurerq gurz gbtrgure gb gur evire gung ehaargu gb Nunin;
naq gurer nobqr jr va gragf guerr qnlf: naq V ivrjrq gur crbcyr, naq
gur cevrfgf, naq sbhaq gurer abar bs gur fbaf bs Yriv.

8:16 Gura frag V sbe Ryvrmre, sbe Nevry, sbe Furznvnu, naq sbe
Ryanguna, naq sbe Wnevo, naq sbe Ryanguna, naq sbe Anguna, naq sbe
Mrpunevnu, naq sbe Zrfuhyynz, puvrs zra; nyfb sbe Wbvnevo, naq sbe
Ryanguna, zra bs haqrefgnaqvat.

8:17 Naq V frag gurz jvgu pbzznaqzrag hagb Vqqb gur puvrs ng gur cynpr
Pnfvcuvn, naq V gbyq gurz jung gurl fubhyq fnl hagb Vqqb, naq gb uvf
oerguera gur Arguvavzf, ng gur cynpr Pnfvcuvn, gung gurl fubhyq oevat
hagb hf zvavfgref sbe gur ubhfr bs bhe Tbq.

8:18 Naq ol gur tbbq unaq bs bhe Tbq hcba hf gurl oebhtug hf n zna bs
haqrefgnaqvat, bs gur fbaf bs Znuyv, gur fba bs Yriv, gur fba bs
Vfenry; naq Furerovnu, jvgu uvf fbaf naq uvf oerguera, rvtugrra; 8:19
Naq Unfunovnu, naq jvgu uvz Wrfunvnu bs gur fbaf bs Zrenev, uvf
oerguera naq gurve fbaf, gjragl; 8:20 Nyfb bs gur Arguvavzf, jubz
Qnivq naq gur cevaprf unq nccbvagrq sbe gur freivpr bs gur Yrivgrf,
gjb uhaqerq naq gjragl Arguvavzf: nyy bs gurz jrer rkcerffrq ol anzr.

8:21 Gura V cebpynvzrq n snfg gurer, ng gur evire bs Nunin, gung jr
zvtug nssyvpg bhefryirf orsber bhe Tbq, gb frrx bs uvz n evtug jnl sbe
hf, naq sbe bhe yvggyr barf, naq sbe nyy bhe fhofgnapr.

8:22 Sbe V jnf nfunzrq gb erdhver bs gur xvat n onaq bs fbyqvref naq
ubefrzra gb uryc hf ntnvafg gur rarzl va gur jnl: orpnhfr jr unq
fcbxra hagb gur xvat, fnlvat, Gur unaq bs bhe Tbq vf hcba nyy gurz sbe
tbbq gung frrx uvz; ohg uvf cbjre naq uvf jengu vf ntnvafg nyy gurz
gung sbefnxr uvz.

8:23 Fb jr snfgrq naq orfbhtug bhe Tbq sbe guvf: naq ur jnf vagerngrq
bs hf.

8:24 Gura V frcnengrq gjryir bs gur puvrs bs gur cevrfgf, Furerovnu,
Unfunovnu, naq gra bs gurve oerguera jvgu gurz, 8:25 Naq jrvturq hagb
gurz gur fvyire, naq gur tbyq, naq gur irffryf, rira gur bssrevat bs
gur ubhfr bs bhe Tbq, juvpu gur xvat, naq uvf pbhafryybef, naq uvf
ybeqf, naq nyy Vfenry gurer cerfrag, unq bssrerq: 8:26 V rira jrvturq
hagb gurve unaq fvk uhaqerq naq svsgl gnyragf bs fvyire, naq fvyire
irffryf na uhaqerq gnyragf, naq bs tbyq na uhaqerq gnyragf; 8:27 Nyfb
gjragl onfbaf bs tbyq, bs n gubhfnaq qenzf; naq gjb irffryf bs svar
pbccre, cerpvbhf nf tbyq.

8:28 Naq V fnvq hagb gurz, Lr ner ubyl hagb gur YBEQ; gur irffryf ner
ubyl nyfb; naq gur fvyire naq gur tbyq ner n serrjvyy bssrevat hagb
gur YBEQ Tbq bs lbhe snguref.

8:29 Jngpu lr, naq xrrc gurz, hagvy lr jrvtu gurz orsber gur puvrs bs
gur cevrfgf naq gur Yrivgrf, naq puvrs bs gur snguref bs Vfenry, ng
Wrehfnyrz, va gur punzoref bs gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ.

8:30 Fb gbbx gur cevrfgf naq gur Yrivgrf gur jrvtug bs gur fvyire, naq
gur tbyq, naq gur irffryf, gb oevat gurz gb Wrehfnyrz hagb gur ubhfr
bs bhe Tbq.

8:31 Gura jr qrcnegrq sebz gur evire bs Nunin ba gur gjrysgu qnl bs
gur svefg zbagu, gb tb hagb Wrehfnyrz: naq gur unaq bs bhe Tbq jnf
hcba hf, naq ur qryvirerq hf sebz gur unaq bs gur rarzl, naq bs fhpu
nf ynl va jnvg ol gur jnl.

8:32 Naq jr pnzr gb Wrehfnyrz, naq nobqr gurer guerr qnlf.

8:33 Abj ba gur sbhegu qnl jnf gur fvyire naq gur tbyq naq gur irffryf
jrvturq va gur ubhfr bs bhe Tbq ol gur unaq bs Zrerzbgu gur fba bs
Hevnu gur cevrfg; naq jvgu uvz jnf Ryrnmne gur fba bs Cuvarunf; naq
jvgu gurz jnf Wbmnonq gur fba bs Wrfuhn, naq Abnqvnu gur fba bs
Ovaahv, Yrivgrf; 8:34 Ol ahzore naq ol jrvtug bs rirel bar: naq nyy
gur jrvtug jnf jevggra ng gung gvzr.

8:35 Nyfb gur puvyqera bs gubfr gung unq orra pneevrq njnl, juvpu jrer
pbzr bhg bs gur pncgvivgl, bssrerq oheag bssrevatf hagb gur Tbq bs
Vfenry, gjryir ohyybpxf sbe nyy Vfenry, avargl naq fvk enzf, friragl
naq frira ynzof, gjryir ur tbngf sbe n fva bssrevat: nyy guvf jnf n
oheag bssrevat hagb gur YBEQ.

8:36 Naq gurl qryvirerq gur xvat'f pbzzvffvbaf hagb gur xvat'f
yvrhgranagf, naq gb gur tbireabef ba guvf fvqr gur evire: naq gurl
shegurerq gur crbcyr, naq gur ubhfr bs Tbq.

9:1 Abj jura gurfr guvatf jrer qbar, gur cevaprf pnzr gb zr, fnlvat,
Gur crbcyr bs Vfenry, naq gur cevrfgf, naq gur Yrivgrf, unir abg
frcnengrq gurzfryirf sebz gur crbcyr bs gur ynaqf, qbvat nppbeqvat gb
gurve nobzvangvbaf, rira bs gur Pnannavgrf, gur Uvggvgrf, gur
Crevmmvgrf, gur Wrohfvgrf, gur Nzzbavgrf, gur Zbnovgrf, gur Rtlcgvnaf,
naq gur Nzbevgrf.

9:2 Sbe gurl unir gnxra bs gurve qnhtugref sbe gurzfryirf, naq sbe
gurve fbaf: fb gung gur ubyl frrq unir zvatyrq gurzfryirf jvgu gur
crbcyr bs gubfr ynaqf: lrn, gur unaq bs gur cevaprf naq ehyref ungu
orra puvrs va guvf gerfcnff.

9:3 Naq jura V urneq guvf guvat, V erag zl tnezrag naq zl znagyr, naq
cyhpxrq bss gur unve bs zl urnq naq bs zl orneq, naq fng qbja
nfgbavrq.

9:4 Gura jrer nffrzoyrq hagb zr rirel bar gung gerzoyrq ng gur jbeqf
bs gur Tbq bs Vfenry, orpnhfr bs gur genafterffvba bs gubfr gung unq
orra pneevrq njnl; naq V fng nfgbavrq hagvy gur riravat fnpevsvpr.

9:5 Naq ng gur riravat fnpevsvpr V nebfr hc sebz zl urnivarff; naq
univat erag zl tnezrag naq zl znagyr, V sryy hcba zl xarrf, naq fcernq
bhg zl unaqf hagb gur YBEQ zl Tbq, 9:6 Naq fnvq, B zl Tbq, V nz
nfunzrq naq oyhfu gb yvsg hc zl snpr gb gurr, zl Tbq: sbe bhe
vavdhvgvrf ner vapernfrq bire bhe urnq, naq bhe gerfcnff vf tebja hc
hagb gur urniraf.

9:7 Fvapr gur qnlf bs bhe snguref unir jr orra va n terng gerfcnff
hagb guvf qnl; naq sbe bhe vavdhvgvrf unir jr, bhe xvatf, naq bhe
cevrfgf, orra qryvirerq vagb gur unaq bs gur xvatf bs gur ynaqf, gb
gur fjbeq, gb pncgvivgl, naq gb n fcbvy, naq gb pbashfvba bs snpr, nf
vg vf guvf qnl.

9:8 Naq abj sbe n yvggyr fcnpr tenpr ungu orra furjrq sebz gur YBEQ
bhe Tbq, gb yrnir hf n erzanag gb rfpncr, naq gb tvir hf n anvy va uvf
ubyl cynpr, gung bhe Tbq znl yvtugra bhe rlrf, naq tvir hf n yvggyr
erivivat va bhe obaqntr.

9:9 Sbe jr jrer obaqzra; lrg bhe Tbq ungu abg sbefnxra hf va bhe
obaqntr, ohg ungu rkgraqrq zrepl hagb hf va gur fvtug bs gur xvatf bs
Crefvn, gb tvir hf n erivivat, gb frg hc gur ubhfr bs bhe Tbq, naq gb
ercnve gur qrfbyngvbaf gurerbs, naq gb tvir hf n jnyy va Whqnu naq va
Wrehfnyrz.

9:10 Naq abj, B bhe Tbq, jung funyy jr fnl nsgre guvf? sbe jr unir
sbefnxra gul pbzznaqzragf, 9:11 Juvpu gubh unfg pbzznaqrq ol gul
freinagf gur cebcurgf, fnlvat, Gur ynaq, hagb juvpu lr tb gb cbffrff
vg, vf na hapyrna ynaq jvgu gur svyguvarff bs gur crbcyr bs gur ynaqf,
jvgu gurve nobzvangvbaf, juvpu unir svyyrq vg sebz bar raq gb nabgure
jvgu gurve hapyrnaarff.

9:12 Abj gurersber tvir abg lbhe qnhtugref hagb gurve fbaf, arvgure
gnxr gurve qnhtugref hagb lbhe fbaf, abe frrx gurve crnpr be gurve
jrnygu sbe rire: gung lr znl or fgebat, naq rng gur tbbq bs gur ynaq,
naq yrnir vg sbe na vaurevgnapr gb lbhe puvyqera sbe rire.

9:13 Naq nsgre nyy gung vf pbzr hcba hf sbe bhe rivy qrrqf, naq sbe
bhe terng gerfcnff, frrvat gung gubh bhe Tbq unfg chavfurq hf yrff
guna bhe vavdhvgvrf qrfreir, naq unfg tvira hf fhpu qryvirenapr nf
guvf; 9:14 Fubhyq jr ntnva oernx gul pbzznaqzragf, naq wbva va
nssvavgl jvgu gur crbcyr bs gurfr nobzvangvbaf? jbhyqrfg abg gubh or
natel jvgu hf gvyy gubh unqfg pbafhzrq hf, fb gung gurer fubhyq or ab
erzanag abe rfpncvat?  9:15 B YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry, gubh neg evtugrbhf:
sbe jr erznva lrg rfpncrq, nf vg vf guvf qnl: orubyq, jr ner orsber
gurr va bhe gerfcnffrf: sbe jr pnaabg fgnaq orsber gurr orpnhfr bs
guvf.

10:1 Abj jura Rmen unq cenlrq, naq jura ur unq pbasrffrq, jrrcvat naq
pnfgvat uvzfrys qbja orsber gur ubhfr bs Tbq, gurer nffrzoyrq hagb uvz
bhg bs Vfenry n irel terng pbatertngvba bs zra naq jbzra naq puvyqera:
sbe gur crbcyr jrcg irel fber.

10:2 Naq Furpunavnu gur fba bs Wruvry, bar bs gur fbaf bs Rynz,
nafjrerq naq fnvq hagb Rmen, Jr unir gerfcnffrq ntnvafg bhe Tbq, naq
unir gnxra fgenatr jvirf bs gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq: lrg abj gurer vf
ubcr va Vfenry pbapreavat guvf guvat.

10:3 Abj gurersber yrg hf znxr n pbiranag jvgu bhe Tbq gb chg njnl nyy
gur jvirf, naq fhpu nf ner obea bs gurz, nppbeqvat gb gur pbhafry bs
zl ybeq, naq bs gubfr gung gerzoyr ng gur pbzznaqzrag bs bhe Tbq; naq
yrg vg or qbar nppbeqvat gb gur ynj.

10:4 Nevfr; sbe guvf znggre orybatrgu hagb gurr: jr nyfb jvyy or jvgu
gurr: or bs tbbq pbhentr, naq qb vg.

10:5 Gura nebfr Rmen, naq znqr gur puvrs cevrfgf, gur Yrivgrf, naq nyy
Vfenry, gb fjrne gung gurl fubhyq qb nppbeqvat gb guvf jbeq. Naq gurl
fjner.

10:6 Gura Rmen ebfr hc sebz orsber gur ubhfr bs Tbq, naq jrag vagb gur
punzore bs Wbunana gur fba bs Ryvnfuvo: naq jura ur pnzr guvgure, ur
qvq rng ab oernq, abe qevax jngre: sbe ur zbhearq orpnhfr bs gur
genafterffvba bs gurz gung unq orra pneevrq njnl.

10:7 Naq gurl znqr cebpynzngvba guebhtubhg Whqnu naq Wrehfnyrz hagb
nyy gur puvyqera bs gur pncgvivgl, gung gurl fubhyq tngure gurzfryirf
gbtrgure hagb Wrehfnyrz; 10:8 Naq gung jubfbrire jbhyq abg pbzr jvguva
guerr qnlf, nppbeqvat gb gur pbhafry bs gur cevaprf naq gur ryqref,
nyy uvf fhofgnapr fubhyq or sbesrvgrq, naq uvzfrys frcnengrq sebz gur
pbatertngvba bs gubfr gung unq orra pneevrq njnl.

10:9 Gura nyy gur zra bs Whqnu naq Orawnzva tngurerq gurzfryirf
gbtrgure hagb Wrehfnyrz jvguva guerr qnlf. Vg jnf gur avagu zbagu, ba
gur gjragvrgu qnl bs gur zbagu; naq nyy gur crbcyr fng va gur fgerrg
bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq, gerzoyvat orpnhfr bs guvf znggre, naq sbe gur
terng enva.

10:10 Naq Rmen gur cevrfg fgbbq hc, naq fnvq hagb gurz, Lr unir
genafterffrq, naq unir gnxra fgenatr jvirf, gb vapernfr gur gerfcnff
bs Vfenry.

10:11 Abj gurersber znxr pbasrffvba hagb gur YBEQ Tbq bs lbhe snguref,
naq qb uvf cyrnfher: naq frcnengr lbhefryirf sebz gur crbcyr bs gur
ynaq, naq sebz gur fgenatr jvirf.

10:12 Gura nyy gur pbatertngvba nafjrerq naq fnvq jvgu n ybhq ibvpr,
Nf gubh unfg fnvq, fb zhfg jr qb.

10:13 Ohg gur crbcyr ner znal, naq vg vf n gvzr bs zhpu enva, naq jr
ner abg noyr gb fgnaq jvgubhg, arvgure vf guvf n jbex bs bar qnl be
gjb: sbe jr ner znal gung unir genafterffrq va guvf guvat.

10:14 Yrg abj bhe ehyref bs nyy gur pbatertngvba fgnaq, naq yrg nyy
gurz juvpu unir gnxra fgenatr jvirf va bhe pvgvrf pbzr ng nccbvagrq
gvzrf, naq jvgu gurz gur ryqref bs rirel pvgl, naq gur whqtrf gurerbs,
hagvy gur svrepr jengu bs bhe Tbq sbe guvf znggre or ghearq sebz hf.

10:15 Bayl Wbanguna gur fba bs Nfnury naq Wnunmvnu gur fba bs Gvxinu
jrer rzcyblrq nobhg guvf znggre: naq Zrfuhyynz naq Funoorgunv gur
Yrivgr urycrq gurz.

10:16 Naq gur puvyqera bs gur pncgvivgl qvq fb. Naq Rmen gur cevrfg,
jvgu pregnva puvrs bs gur snguref, nsgre gur ubhfr bs gurve snguref,
naq nyy bs gurz ol gurve anzrf, jrer frcnengrq, naq fng qbja va gur
svefg qnl bs gur gragu zbagu gb rknzvar gur znggre.

10:17 Naq gurl znqr na raq jvgu nyy gur zra gung unq gnxra fgenatr
jvirf ol gur svefg qnl bs gur svefg zbagu.

10:18 Naq nzbat gur fbaf bs gur cevrfgf gurer jrer sbhaq gung unq
gnxra fgenatr jvirf: anzryl, bs gur fbaf bs Wrfuhn gur fba bs Wbmnqnx,
naq uvf oerguera; Znnfrvnu, naq Ryvrmre, naq Wnevo, naq Trqnyvnu.

10:19 Naq gurl tnir gurve unaqf gung gurl jbhyq chg njnl gurve jvirf;
naq orvat thvygl, gurl bssrerq n enz bs gur sybpx sbe gurve gerfcnff.

10:20 Naq bs gur fbaf bs Vzzre; Unanav, naq Mronqvnu.

10:21 Naq bs gur fbaf bs Unevz; Znnfrvnu, naq Ryvwnu, naq Furznvnu,
naq Wruvry, naq Hmmvnu.

10:22 Naq bs gur fbaf bs Cnfuhe; Ryvbranv, Znnfrvnu, Vfuznry,
Argunarry, Wbmnonq, naq Rynfnu.

10:23 Nyfb bs gur Yrivgrf; Wbmnonq, naq Fuvzrv, naq Xrynvnu, (gur fnzr
vf Xryvgn,) Crgunuvnu, Whqnu, naq Ryvrmre.

10:24 Bs gur fvatref nyfb; Ryvnfuvo: naq bs gur cbegref; Funyyhz, naq
Gryrz, naq Hev.

10:25 Zberbire bs Vfenry: bs gur fbaf bs Cnebfu; Enzvnu, naq Wrmvnu,
naq Znypuvnu, naq Zvnzva, naq Ryrnmne, naq Znypuvwnu, naq Oranvnu.

10:26 Naq bs gur fbaf bs Rynz; Znggnavnu, Mrpunevnu, naq Wruvry, naq
Noqv, naq Wrerzbgu, naq Ryvnu.

10:27 Naq bs gur fbaf bs Mnggh; Ryvbranv, Ryvnfuvo, Znggnavnu, naq
Wrerzbgu, naq Mnonq, naq Nmvmn.

10:28 Bs gur fbaf nyfb bs Oronv; Wrubunana, Unanavnu, Mnoonv, naq
Nguynv.

10:29 Naq bs gur fbaf bs Onav; Zrfuhyynz, Znyyhpu, naq Nqnvnu, Wnfuho,
naq Furny, naq Enzbgu.

10:30 Naq bs gur fbaf bs Cnunguzbno; Nqan, naq Puryny, Oranvnu,
Znnfrvnu, Znggnavnu, Ormnyrry, naq Ovaahv, naq Znanffru.

10:31 Naq bs gur fbaf bs Unevz; Ryvrmre, Vfuvwnu, Znypuvnu, Furznvnu,
Fuvzrba, 10:32 Orawnzva, Znyyhpu, naq Furznevnu.

10:33 Bs gur fbaf bs Unfuhz; Znggranv, Znggngunu, Mnonq, Ryvcuryrg,
Wrerznv, Znanffru, naq Fuvzrv.

10:34 Bs gur fbaf bs Onav; Znnqnv, Nzenz, naq Hry, 10:35 Oranvnu,
Orqrvnu, Puryyhu, 10:36 Inavnu, Zrerzbgu, Ryvnfuvo, 10:37 Znggnavnu,
Znggranv, naq Wnnfnh, 10:38 Naq Onav, naq Ovaahv, Fuvzrv, 10:39 Naq
Furyrzvnu, naq Anguna, naq Nqnvnu, 10:40 Znpuanqronv, Funfunv, Funenv,
10:41 Nmnerry, naq Furyrzvnu, Furznevnu, 10:42 Funyyhz, Nznevnu, naq
Wbfrcu.

10:43 Bs gur fbaf bs Arob; Wrvry, Znggvguvnu, Mnonq, Mrovan, Wnqnh,
naq Wbry, Oranvnu.

10:44 Nyy gurfr unq gnxra fgenatr jvirf: naq fbzr bs gurz unq jvirf ol
jubz gurl unq puvyqera.




Gur Obbx bs Arurzvnu


1:1 Gur jbeqf bs Arurzvnu gur fba bs Unpunyvnu. Naq vg pnzr gb cnff
va gur zbagu Puvfyrh, va gur gjragvrgu lrne, nf V jnf va Fuhfuna gur
cnynpr, 1:2 Gung Unanav, bar bs zl oerguera, pnzr, ur naq pregnva zra
bs Whqnu; naq V nfxrq gurz pbapreavat gur Wrjf gung unq rfpncrq, juvpu
jrer yrsg bs gur pncgvivgl, naq pbapreavat Wrehfnyrz.

1:3 Naq gurl fnvq hagb zr, Gur erzanag gung ner yrsg bs gur pncgvivgl
gurer va gur cebivapr ner va terng nssyvpgvba naq ercebnpu: gur jnyy
bs Wrehfnyrz nyfb vf oebxra qbja, naq gur tngrf gurerbs ner ohearq
jvgu sver.

1:4 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura V urneq gurfr jbeqf, gung V fng qbja naq
jrcg, naq zbhearq pregnva qnlf, naq snfgrq, naq cenlrq orsber gur Tbq
bs urnira, 1:5 Naq fnvq, V orfrrpu gurr, B YBEQ Tbq bs urnira, gur
terng naq greevoyr Tbq, gung xrrcrgu pbiranag naq zrepl sbe gurz gung
ybir uvz naq bofreir uvf pbzznaqzragf: 1:6 Yrg guvar rne abj or
nggragvir, naq guvar rlrf bcra, gung gubh znlrfg urne gur cenlre bs
gul freinag, juvpu V cenl orsber gurr abj, qnl naq avtug, sbe gur
puvyqera bs Vfenry gul freinagf, naq pbasrff gur fvaf bs gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry, juvpu jr unir fvaarq ntnvafg gurr: obgu V naq zl sngure'f
ubhfr unir fvaarq.

1:7 Jr unir qrnyg irel pbeehcgyl ntnvafg gurr, naq unir abg xrcg gur
pbzznaqzragf, abe gur fgnghgrf, abe gur whqtzragf, juvpu gubh
pbzznaqrqfg gul freinag Zbfrf.

1:8 Erzrzore, V orfrrpu gurr, gur jbeq gung gubh pbzznaqrqfg gul
freinag Zbfrf, fnlvat, Vs lr genafterff, V jvyy fpnggre lbh noebnq
nzbat gur angvbaf: 1:9 Ohg vs lr ghea hagb zr, naq xrrc zl
pbzznaqzragf, naq qb gurz; gubhtu gurer jrer bs lbh pnfg bhg hagb gur
hggrezbfg cneg bs gur urnira, lrg jvyy V tngure gurz sebz gurapr, naq
jvyy oevat gurz hagb gur cynpr gung V unir pubfra gb frg zl anzr
gurer.

1:10 Abj gurfr ner gul freinagf naq gul crbcyr, jubz gubh unfg
erqrrzrq ol gul terng cbjre, naq ol gul fgebat unaq.

1:11 B YBEQ, V orfrrpu gurr, yrg abj guvar rne or nggragvir gb gur
cenlre bs gul freinag, naq gb gur cenlre bs gul freinagf, jub qrfver
gb srne gul anzr: naq cebfcre, V cenl gurr, gul freinag guvf qnl, naq
tenag uvz zrepl va gur fvtug bs guvf zna. Sbe V jnf gur xvat'f
phcornere.

2:1 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff va gur zbagu Avfna, va gur gjragvrgu lrne bs
Negnkrekrf gur xvat, gung jvar jnf orsber uvz: naq V gbbx hc gur jvar,
naq tnir vg hagb gur xvat. Abj V unq abg orra orsbergvzr fnq va uvf
cerfrapr.

2:2 Jurersber gur xvat fnvq hagb zr, Jul vf gul pbhagranapr fnq,
frrvat gubh neg abg fvpx? guvf vf abguvat ryfr ohg fbeebj bs urneg.
Gura V jnf irel fber nsenvq, 2:3 Naq fnvq hagb gur xvat, Yrg gur xvat
yvir sbe rire: jul fubhyq abg zl pbhagranapr or fnq, jura gur pvgl,
gur cynpr bs zl snguref' frchypuerf, yvrgu jnfgr, naq gur tngrf
gurerbs ner pbafhzrq jvgu sver?  2:4 Gura gur xvat fnvq hagb zr, Sbe
jung qbfg gubh znxr erdhrfg? Fb V cenlrq gb gur Tbq bs urnira.

2:5 Naq V fnvq hagb gur xvat, Vs vg cyrnfr gur xvat, naq vs gul
freinag unir sbhaq snibhe va gul fvtug, gung gubh jbhyqrfg fraq zr
hagb Whqnu, hagb gur pvgl bs zl snguref' frchypuerf, gung V znl ohvyq
vg.

2:6 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb zr, (gur dhrra nyfb fvggvat ol uvz,) Sbe
ubj ybat funyy gul wbhearl or? naq jura jvyg gubh erghea? Fb vg
cyrnfrq gur xvat gb fraq zr; naq V frg uvz n gvzr.

2:7 Zberbire V fnvq hagb gur xvat, Vs vg cyrnfr gur xvat, yrg yrggref
or tvira zr gb gur tbireabef orlbaq gur evire, gung gurl znl pbairl zr
bire gvyy V pbzr vagb Whqnu; 2:8 Naq n yrggre hagb Nfncu gur xrrcre bs
gur xvat'f sberfg, gung ur znl tvir zr gvzore gb znxr ornzf sbe gur
tngrf bs gur cnynpr juvpu nccregnvarq gb gur ubhfr, naq sbe gur jnyy
bs gur pvgl, naq sbe gur ubhfr gung V funyy ragre vagb. Naq gur xvat
tenagrq zr, nppbeqvat gb gur tbbq unaq bs zl Tbq hcba zr.

2:9 Gura V pnzr gb gur tbireabef orlbaq gur evire, naq tnir gurz gur
xvat'f yrggref. Abj gur xvat unq frag pncgnvaf bs gur nezl naq
ubefrzra jvgu zr.

2:10 Jura Fnaonyyng gur Ubebavgr, naq Gbovnu gur freinag, gur
Nzzbavgr, urneq bs vg, vg tevrirq gurz rkprrqvatyl gung gurer jnf pbzr
n zna gb frrx gur jrysner bs gur puvyqera bs Vfenry.

2:11 Fb V pnzr gb Wrehfnyrz, naq jnf gurer guerr qnlf.

2:12 Naq V nebfr va gur avtug, V naq fbzr srj zra jvgu zr; arvgure
gbyq V nal zna jung zl Tbq unq chg va zl urneg gb qb ng Wrehfnyrz:
arvgure jnf gurer nal ornfg jvgu zr, fnir gur ornfg gung V ebqr hcba.

2:13 Naq V jrag bhg ol avtug ol gur tngr bs gur inyyrl, rira orsber
gur qentba jryy, naq gb gur qhat cbeg, naq ivrjrq gur jnyyf bs
Wrehfnyrz, juvpu jrer oebxra qbja, naq gur tngrf gurerbs jrer pbafhzrq
jvgu sver.

2:14 Gura V jrag ba gb gur tngr bs gur sbhagnva, naq gb gur xvat'f
cbby: ohg gurer jnf ab cynpr sbe gur ornfg gung jnf haqre zr gb cnff.

2:15 Gura jrag V hc va gur avtug ol gur oebbx, naq ivrjrq gur jnyy,
naq ghearq onpx, naq ragrerq ol gur tngr bs gur inyyrl, naq fb
erghearq.

2:16 Naq gur ehyref xarj abg juvgure V jrag, be jung V qvq; arvgure
unq V nf lrg gbyq vg gb gur Wrjf, abe gb gur cevrfgf, abe gb gur
aboyrf, abe gb gur ehyref, abe gb gur erfg gung qvq gur jbex.

2:17 Gura fnvq V hagb gurz, Lr frr gur qvfgerff gung jr ner va, ubj
Wrehfnyrz yvrgu jnfgr, naq gur tngrf gurerbs ner ohearq jvgu sver:
pbzr, naq yrg hf ohvyq hc gur jnyy bs Wrehfnyrz, gung jr or ab zber n
ercebnpu.

2:18 Gura V gbyq gurz bs gur unaq bs zl Tbq juvpu jnf tbbq hcba zr; nf
nyfb gur xvat'f jbeqf gung ur unq fcbxra hagb zr. Naq gurl fnvq, Yrg
hf evfr hc naq ohvyq. Fb gurl fgeratgurarq gurve unaqf sbe guvf tbbq
jbex.

2:19 Ohg jura Fnaonyyng gur Ubebavgr, naq Gbovnu gur freinag, gur
Nzzbavgr, naq Trfurz gur Nenovna, urneq vg, gurl ynhturq hf gb fpbea,
naq qrfcvfrq hf, naq fnvq, Jung vf guvf guvat gung lr qb? jvyy lr
erory ntnvafg gur xvat?  2:20 Gura nafjrerq V gurz, naq fnvq hagb
gurz, Gur Tbq bs urnira, ur jvyy cebfcre hf; gurersber jr uvf freinagf
jvyy nevfr naq ohvyq: ohg lr unir ab cbegvba, abe evtug, abe zrzbevny,
va Wrehfnyrz.

3:1 Gura Ryvnfuvo gur uvtu cevrfg ebfr hc jvgu uvf oerguera gur
cevrfgf, naq gurl ohvyqrq gur furrc tngr; gurl fnapgvsvrq vg, naq frg
hc gur qbbef bs vg; rira hagb gur gbjre bs Zrnu gurl fnapgvsvrq vg,
hagb gur gbjre bs Unanarry.

3:2 Naq arkg hagb uvz ohvyqrq gur zra bs Wrevpub. Naq arkg gb gurz
ohvyqrq Mnpphe gur fba bs Vzev.

3:3 Ohg gur svfu tngr qvq gur fbaf bs Unffrannu ohvyq, jub nyfb ynvq
gur ornzf gurerbs, naq frg hc gur qbbef gurerbs, gur ybpxf gurerbs,
naq gur onef gurerbs.

3:4 Naq arkg hagb gurz ercnverq Zrerzbgu gur fba bs Hevwnu, gur fba bs
Xbm. Naq arkg hagb gurz ercnverq Zrfuhyynz gur fba bs Orerpuvnu, gur
fba bs Zrfurmnorry. Naq arkg hagb gurz ercnverq Mnqbx gur fba bs
Onnan.

3:5 Naq arkg hagb gurz gur Grxbvgrf ercnverq; ohg gurve aboyrf chg abg
gurve arpxf gb gur jbex bs gurve YBEQ.

3:6 Zberbire gur byq tngr ercnverq Wrubvnqn gur fba bs Cnfrnu, naq
Zrfuhyynz gur fba bs Orfbqrvnu; gurl ynvq gur ornzf gurerbs, naq frg
hc gur qbbef gurerbs, naq gur ybpxf gurerbs, naq gur onef gurerbs.

3:7 Naq arkg hagb gurz ercnverq Zryngvnu gur Tvorbavgr, naq Wnqba gur
Zrebabguvgr, gur zra bs Tvorba, naq bs Zvmcnu, hagb gur guebar bs gur
tbireabe ba guvf fvqr gur evire.

3:8 Arkg hagb uvz ercnverq Hmmvry gur fba bs Uneunvnu, bs gur
tbyqfzvguf.

Arkg hagb uvz nyfb ercnverq Unanavnu gur fba bs bar bs gur
ncbgurpnevrf, naq gurl sbegvsvrq Wrehfnyrz hagb gur oebnq jnyy.

3:9 Naq arkg hagb gurz ercnverq Ercunvnu gur fba bs Uhe, gur ehyre bs
gur unys cneg bs Wrehfnyrz.

3:10 Naq arkg hagb gurz ercnverq Wrqnvnu gur fba bs Unehzncu, rira
bire ntnvafg uvf ubhfr. Naq arkg hagb uvz ercnverq Ungghfu gur fba bs
Unfunoavnu.

3:11 Znypuvwnu gur fba bs Unevz, naq Unfuho gur fba bs Cnunguzbno,
ercnverq gur bgure cvrpr, naq gur gbjre bs gur sheanprf.

3:12 Naq arkg hagb uvz ercnverq Funyyhz gur fba bs Unyburfu, gur ehyre
bs gur unys cneg bs Wrehfnyrz, ur naq uvf qnhtugref.

3:13 Gur inyyrl tngr ercnverq Unaha, naq gur vaunovgnagf bs Mnabnu;
gurl ohvyg vg, naq frg hc gur qbbef gurerbs, gur ybpxf gurerbs, naq
gur onef gurerbs, naq n gubhfnaq phovgf ba gur jnyy hagb gur qhat
tngr.

3:14 Ohg gur qhat tngr ercnverq Znypuvnu gur fba bs Erpuno, gur ehyre
bs cneg bs Orguunpprerz; ur ohvyg vg, naq frg hc gur qbbef gurerbs,
gur ybpxf gurerbs, naq gur onef gurerbs.

3:15 Ohg gur tngr bs gur sbhagnva ercnverq Funyyha gur fba bs
Pbyubmru, gur ehyre bs cneg bs Zvmcnu; ur ohvyg vg, naq pbirerq vg,
naq frg hc gur qbbef gurerbs, gur ybpxf gurerbs, naq gur onef gurerbs,
naq gur jnyy bs gur cbby bs Fvybnu ol gur xvat'f tneqra, naq hagb gur
fgnvef gung tb qbja sebz gur pvgl bs Qnivq.

3:16 Nsgre uvz ercnverq Arurzvnu gur fba bs Nmohx, gur ehyre bs gur
unys cneg bs Orgumhe, hagb gur cynpr bire ntnvafg gur frchypuerf bs
Qnivq, naq gb gur cbby gung jnf znqr, naq hagb gur ubhfr bs gur
zvtugl.

3:17 Nsgre uvz ercnverq gur Yrivgrf, Eruhz gur fba bs Onav. Arkg hagb
uvz ercnverq Unfunovnu, gur ehyre bs gur unys cneg bs Xrvynu, va uvf
cneg.

3:18 Nsgre uvz ercnverq gurve oerguera, Oninv gur fba bs Uranqnq, gur
ehyre bs gur unys cneg bs Xrvynu.

3:19 Naq arkg gb uvz ercnverq Rmre gur fba bs Wrfuhn, gur ehyre bs
Zvmcnu, nabgure cvrpr bire ntnvafg gur tbvat hc gb gur nezbhel ng gur
gheavat bs gur jnyy.

3:20 Nsgre uvz Onehpu gur fba bs Mnoonv rnearfgyl ercnverq gur bgure
cvrpr, sebz gur gheavat bs gur jnyy hagb gur qbbe bs gur ubhfr bs
Ryvnfuvo gur uvtu cevrfg.

3:21 Nsgre uvz ercnverq Zrerzbgu gur fba bs Hevwnu gur fba bs Xbm
nabgure cvrpr, sebz gur qbbe bs gur ubhfr bs Ryvnfuvo rira gb gur raq
bs gur ubhfr bs Ryvnfuvo.

3:22 Naq nsgre uvz ercnverq gur cevrfgf, gur zra bs gur cynva.

3:23 Nsgre uvz ercnverq Orawnzva naq Unfuho bire ntnvafg gurve ubhfr.

Nsgre uvz ercnverq Nmnevnu gur fba bs Znnfrvnu gur fba bs Nanavnu ol
uvf ubhfr.

3:24 Nsgre uvz ercnverq Ovaahv gur fba bs Uranqnq nabgure cvrpr, sebz
gur ubhfr bs Nmnevnu hagb gur gheavat bs gur jnyy, rira hagb gur
pbeare.

3:25 Cnyny gur fba bs Hmnv, bire ntnvafg gur gheavat bs gur jnyy, naq
gur gbjre juvpu yvrgu bhg sebz gur xvat'f uvtu ubhfr, gung jnf ol gur
pbheg bs gur cevfba. Nsgre uvz Crqnvnu gur fba bs Cnebfu.

3:26 Zberbire gur Arguvavzf qjryg va Bcury, hagb gur cynpr bire
ntnvafg gur jngre tngr gbjneq gur rnfg, naq gur gbjre gung yvrgu bhg.

3:27 Nsgre gurz gur Grxbvgrf ercnverq nabgure cvrpr, bire ntnvafg gur
terng gbjre gung yvrgu bhg, rira hagb gur jnyy bs Bcury.

3:28 Sebz nobir gur ubefr tngr ercnverq gur cevrfgf, rirel bar bire
ntnvafg uvf ubhfr.

3:29 Nsgre gurz ercnverq Mnqbx gur fba bs Vzzre bire ntnvafg uvf
ubhfr.

Nsgre uvz ercnverq nyfb Furznvnu gur fba bs Furpunavnu, gur xrrcre bs
gur rnfg tngr.

3:30 Nsgre uvz ercnverq Unanavnu gur fba bs Furyrzvnu, naq Unaha gur
fvkgu fba bs Mnyncu, nabgure cvrpr. Nsgre uvz ercnverq Zrfuhyynz gur
fba bs Orerpuvnu bire ntnvafg uvf punzore.

3:31 Nsgre uvz ercnverq Znypuvnu gur tbyqfzvgu'f fba hagb gur cynpr bs
gur Arguvavzf, naq bs gur zrepunagf, bire ntnvafg gur tngr Zvcuxnq,
naq gb gur tbvat hc bs gur pbeare.

3:32 Naq orgjrra gur tbvat hc bs gur pbeare hagb gur furrc tngr
ercnverq gur tbyqfzvguf naq gur zrepunagf.

4:1 Ohg vg pnzr gb cnff, gung jura Fnaonyyng urneq gung jr ohvyqrq gur
jnyy, ur jnf jebgu, naq gbbx terng vaqvtangvba, naq zbpxrq gur Wrjf.

4:2 Naq ur fcnxr orsber uvf oerguera naq gur nezl bs Fnznevn, naq
fnvq, Jung qb gurfr srroyr Wrjf? jvyy gurl sbegvsl gurzfryirf? jvyy
gurl fnpevsvpr?  jvyy gurl znxr na raq va n qnl? jvyy gurl erivir gur
fgbarf bhg bs gur urncf bs gur ehoovfu juvpu ner ohearq?  4:3 Abj
Gbovnu gur Nzzbavgr jnf ol uvz, naq ur fnvq, Rira gung juvpu gurl
ohvyq, vs n sbk tb hc, ur funyy rira oernx qbja gurve fgbar jnyy.

4:4 Urne, B bhe Tbq; sbe jr ner qrfcvfrq: naq ghea gurve ercebnpu hcba
gurve bja urnq, naq tvir gurz sbe n cerl va gur ynaq bs pncgvivgl: 4:5
Naq pbire abg gurve vavdhvgl, naq yrg abg gurve fva or oybggrq bhg
sebz orsber gurr: sbe gurl unir cebibxrq gurr gb natre orsber gur
ohvyqref.

4:6 Fb ohvyg jr gur jnyy; naq nyy gur jnyy jnf wbvarq gbtrgure hagb
gur unys gurerbs: sbe gur crbcyr unq n zvaq gb jbex.

4:7 Ohg vg pnzr gb cnff, gung jura Fnaonyyng, naq Gbovnu, naq gur
Nenovnaf, naq gur Nzzbavgrf, naq gur Nfuqbqvgrf, urneq gung gur jnyyf
bs Wrehfnyrz jrer znqr hc, naq gung gur oernpurf ortna gb or fgbccrq,
gura gurl jrer irel jebgu, 4:8 Naq pbafcverq nyy bs gurz gbtrgure gb
pbzr naq gb svtug ntnvafg Wrehfnyrz, naq gb uvaqre vg.

4:9 Arireguryrff jr znqr bhe cenlre hagb bhe Tbq, naq frg n jngpu
ntnvafg gurz qnl naq avtug, orpnhfr bs gurz.

4:10 Naq Whqnu fnvq, Gur fgeratgu bs gur orneref bs oheqraf vf
qrpnlrq, naq gurer vf zhpu ehoovfu; fb gung jr ner abg noyr gb ohvyq
gur jnyy.

4:11 Naq bhe nqirefnevrf fnvq, Gurl funyy abg xabj, arvgure frr, gvyy
jr pbzr va gur zvqfg nzbat gurz, naq fynl gurz, naq pnhfr gur jbex gb
prnfr.

4:12 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung jura gur Wrjf juvpu qjryg ol gurz pnzr,
gurl fnvq hagb hf gra gvzrf, Sebz nyy cynprf jurapr lr funyy erghea
hagb hf gurl jvyy or hcba lbh.

4:13 Gurersber frg V va gur ybjre cynprf oruvaq gur jnyy, naq ba gur
uvture cynprf, V rira frg gur crbcyr nsgre gurve snzvyvrf jvgu gurve
fjbeqf, gurve fcrnef, naq gurve objf.

4:14 Naq V ybbxrq, naq ebfr hc, naq fnvq hagb gur aboyrf, naq gb gur
ehyref, naq gb gur erfg bs gur crbcyr, Or abg lr nsenvq bs gurz:
erzrzore gur YBEQ, juvpu vf terng naq greevoyr, naq svtug sbe lbhe
oerguera, lbhe fbaf, naq lbhe qnhtugref, lbhe jvirf, naq lbhe ubhfrf.

4:15 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, jura bhe rarzvrf urneq gung vg jnf xabja
hagb hf, naq Tbq unq oebhtug gurve pbhafry gb abhtug, gung jr erghearq
nyy bs hf gb gur jnyy, rirel bar hagb uvf jbex.

4:16 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff sebz gung gvzr sbegu, gung gur unys bs zl
freinagf jebhtug va gur jbex, naq gur bgure unys bs gurz uryq obgu gur
fcrnef, gur fuvryqf, naq gur objf, naq gur unoretrbaf; naq gur ehyref
jrer oruvaq nyy gur ubhfr bs Whqnu.

4:17 Gurl juvpu ohvyqrq ba gur jnyy, naq gurl gung oner oheqraf, jvgu
gubfr gung ynqrq, rirel bar jvgu bar bs uvf unaqf jebhtug va gur jbex,
naq jvgu gur bgure unaq uryq n jrncba.

4:18 Sbe gur ohvyqref, rirel bar unq uvf fjbeq tveqrq ol uvf fvqr, naq
fb ohvyqrq. Naq ur gung fbhaqrq gur gehzcrg jnf ol zr.

4:19 Naq V fnvq hagb gur aboyrf, naq gb gur ehyref, naq gb gur erfg bs
gur crbcyr, Gur jbex vf terng naq ynetr, naq jr ner frcnengrq hcba gur
jnyy, bar sne sebz nabgure.

4:20 Va jung cynpr gurersber lr urne gur fbhaq bs gur gehzcrg, erfbeg
lr guvgure hagb hf: bhe Tbq funyy svtug sbe hf.

4:21 Fb jr ynobherq va gur jbex: naq unys bs gurz uryq gur fcrnef sebz
gur evfvat bs gur zbeavat gvyy gur fgnef nccrnerq.

4:22 Yvxrjvfr ng gur fnzr gvzr fnvq V hagb gur crbcyr, Yrg rirel bar
jvgu uvf freinag ybqtr jvguva Wrehfnyrz, gung va gur avtug gurl znl or
n thneq gb hf, naq ynobhe ba gur qnl.

4:23 Fb arvgure V, abe zl oerguera, abe zl freinagf, abe gur zra bs
gur thneq juvpu sbyybjrq zr, abar bs hf chg bss bhe pybgurf, fnivat
gung rirel bar chg gurz bss sbe jnfuvat.

5:1 Naq gurer jnf n terng pel bs gur crbcyr naq bs gurve jvirf ntnvafg
gurve oerguera gur Wrjf.

5:2 Sbe gurer jrer gung fnvq, Jr, bhe fbaf, naq bhe qnhtugref, ner
znal: gurersber jr gnxr hc pbea sbe gurz, gung jr znl rng, naq yvir.

5:3 Fbzr nyfb gurer jrer gung fnvq, Jr unir zbegtntrq bhe ynaqf,
ivarlneqf, naq ubhfrf, gung jr zvtug ohl pbea, orpnhfr bs gur qrnegu.

5:4 Gurer jrer nyfb gung fnvq, Jr unir obeebjrq zbarl sbe gur xvat'f
gevohgr, naq gung hcba bhe ynaqf naq ivarlneqf.

5:5 Lrg abj bhe syrfu vf nf gur syrfu bs bhe oerguera, bhe puvyqera nf
gurve puvyqera: naq, yb, jr oevat vagb obaqntr bhe fbaf naq bhe
qnhtugref gb or freinagf, naq fbzr bs bhe qnhtugref ner oebhtug hagb
obaqntr nyernql: arvgure vf vg va bhe cbjre gb erqrrz gurz; sbe bgure
zra unir bhe ynaqf naq ivarlneqf.

5:6 Naq V jnf irel natel jura V urneq gurve pel naq gurfr jbeqf.

5:7 Gura V pbafhygrq jvgu zlfrys, naq V erohxrq gur aboyrf, naq gur
ehyref, naq fnvq hagb gurz, Lr rknpg hfhel, rirel bar bs uvf oebgure.
Naq V frg n terng nffrzoyl ntnvafg gurz.

5:8 Naq V fnvq hagb gurz, Jr nsgre bhe novyvgl unir erqrrzrq bhe
oerguera gur Wrjf, juvpu jrer fbyq hagb gur urngura; naq jvyy lr rira
fryy lbhe oerguera? be funyy gurl or fbyq hagb hf? Gura uryq gurl
gurve crnpr, naq sbhaq abguvat gb nafjre.

5:9 Nyfb V fnvq, Vg vf abg tbbq gung lr qb: bhtug lr abg gb jnyx va
gur srne bs bhe Tbq orpnhfr bs gur ercebnpu bs gur urngura bhe
rarzvrf?  5:10 V yvxrjvfr, naq zl oerguera, naq zl freinagf, zvtug
rknpg bs gurz zbarl naq pbea: V cenl lbh, yrg hf yrnir bss guvf hfhel.

5:11 Erfgber, V cenl lbh, gb gurz, rira guvf qnl, gurve ynaqf, gurve
ivarlneqf, gurve byvirlneqf, naq gurve ubhfrf, nyfb gur uhaqerqgu cneg
bs gur zbarl, naq bs gur pbea, gur jvar, naq gur bvy, gung lr rknpg bs
gurz.

5:12 Gura fnvq gurl, Jr jvyy erfgber gurz, naq jvyy erdhver abguvat bs
gurz; fb jvyy jr qb nf gubh fnlrfg. Gura V pnyyrq gur cevrfgf, naq
gbbx na bngu bs gurz, gung gurl fubhyq qb nppbeqvat gb guvf cebzvfr.

5:13 Nyfb V fubbx zl ync, naq fnvq, Fb Tbq funxr bhg rirel zna sebz
uvf ubhfr, naq sebz uvf ynobhe, gung cresbezrgu abg guvf cebzvfr, rira
guhf or ur funxra bhg, naq rzcgvrq. Naq nyy gur pbatertngvba fnvq,
Nzra, naq cenvfrq gur YBEQ. Naq gur crbcyr qvq nppbeqvat gb guvf
cebzvfr.

5:14 Zberbire sebz gur gvzr gung V jnf nccbvagrq gb or gurve tbireabe
va gur ynaq bs Whqnu, sebz gur gjragvrgu lrne rira hagb gur gjb naq
guvegvrgu lrne bs Negnkrekrf gur xvat, gung vf, gjryir lrnef, V naq zl
oerguera unir abg rngra gur oernq bs gur tbireabe.

5:15 Ohg gur sbezre tbireabef gung unq orra orsber zr jrer punetrnoyr
hagb gur crbcyr, naq unq gnxra bs gurz oernq naq jvar, orfvqr sbegl
furxryf bs fvyire; lrn, rira gurve freinagf oner ehyr bire gur crbcyr:
ohg fb qvq abg V, orpnhfr bs gur srne bs Tbq.

5:16 Lrn, nyfb V pbagvahrq va gur jbex bs guvf jnyy, arvgure obhtug jr
nal ynaq: naq nyy zl freinagf jrer tngurerq guvgure hagb gur jbex.

5:17 Zberbire gurer jrer ng zl gnoyr na uhaqerq naq svsgl bs gur Wrjf
naq ehyref, orfvqr gubfr gung pnzr hagb hf sebz nzbat gur urngura gung
ner nobhg hf.

5:18 Abj gung juvpu jnf cercnerq sbe zr qnvyl jnf bar bk naq fvk
pubvpr furrc; nyfb sbjyf jrer cercnerq sbe zr, naq bapr va gra qnlf
fgber bs nyy fbegf bs jvar: lrg sbe nyy guvf erdhverq abg V gur oernq
bs gur tbireabe, orpnhfr gur obaqntr jnf urnil hcba guvf crbcyr.

5:19 Guvax hcba zr, zl Tbq, sbe tbbq, nppbeqvat gb nyy gung V unir
qbar sbe guvf crbcyr.

6:1 Abj vg pnzr gb cnff jura Fnaonyyng, naq Gbovnu, naq Trfurz gur
Nenovna, naq gur erfg bs bhe rarzvrf, urneq gung V unq ohvyqrq gur
jnyy, naq gung gurer jnf ab oernpu yrsg gurerva; (gubhtu ng gung gvzr
V unq abg frg hc gur qbbef hcba gur tngrf;) 6:2 Gung Fnaonyyng naq
Trfurz frag hagb zr, fnlvat, Pbzr, yrg hf zrrg gbtrgure va fbzr bar bs
gur ivyyntrf va gur cynva bs Bab. Ohg gurl gubhtug gb qb zr zvfpuvrs.

6:3 Naq V frag zrffratref hagb gurz, fnlvat, V nz qbvat n terng jbex,
fb gung V pnaabg pbzr qbja: jul fubhyq gur jbex prnfr, juvyfg V yrnir
vg, naq pbzr qbja gb lbh?  6:4 Lrg gurl frag hagb zr sbhe gvzrf nsgre
guvf fbeg; naq V nafjrerq gurz nsgre gur fnzr znaare.

6:5 Gura frag Fnaonyyng uvf freinag hagb zr va yvxr znaare gur svsgu
gvzr jvgu na bcra yrggre va uvf unaq; 6:6 Jurerva jnf jevggra, Vg vf
ercbegrq nzbat gur urngura, naq Tnfuzh fnvgu vg, gung gubh naq gur
Wrjf guvax gb erory: sbe juvpu pnhfr gubh ohvyqrfg gur jnyy, gung gubh
znlrfg or gurve xvat, nppbeqvat gb gurfr jbeqf.

6:7 Naq gubh unfg nyfb nccbvagrq cebcurgf gb cernpu bs gurr ng
Wrehfnyrz, fnlvat, Gurer vf n xvat va Whqnu: naq abj funyy vg or
ercbegrq gb gur xvat nppbeqvat gb gurfr jbeqf. Pbzr abj gurersber, naq
yrg hf gnxr pbhafry gbtrgure.

6:8 Gura V frag hagb uvz, fnlvat, Gurer ner ab fhpu guvatf qbar nf
gubh fnlrfg, ohg gubh srvtarfg gurz bhg bs guvar bja urneg.

6:9 Sbe gurl nyy znqr hf nsenvq, fnlvat, Gurve unaqf funyy or jrnxrarq
sebz gur jbex, gung vg or abg qbar. Abj gurersber, B Tbq, fgeratgura
zl unaqf.

6:10 Nsgrejneq V pnzr hagb gur ubhfr bs Furznvnu gur fba bs Qrynvnu
gur fba bs Zrurgnorry, jub jnf fuhg hc; naq ur fnvq, Yrg hf zrrg
gbtrgure va gur ubhfr bs Tbq, jvguva gur grzcyr, naq yrg hf fuhg gur
qbbef bs gur grzcyr: sbe gurl jvyy pbzr gb fynl gurr; lrn, va gur
avtug jvyy gurl pbzr gb fynl gurr.

6:11 Naq V fnvq, Fubhyq fhpu n zna nf V syrr? naq jub vf gurer, gung,
orvat nf V nz, jbhyq tb vagb gur grzcyr gb fnir uvf yvsr? V jvyy abg
tb va.

6:12 Naq, yb, V creprvirq gung Tbq unq abg frag uvz; ohg gung ur
cebabhaprq guvf cebcurpl ntnvafg zr: sbe Gbovnu naq Fnaonyyng unq
uverq uvz.

6:13 Gurersber jnf ur uverq, gung V fubhyq or nsenvq, naq qb fb, naq
fva, naq gung gurl zvtug unir znggre sbe na rivy ercbeg, gung gurl
zvtug ercebnpu zr.

6:14 Zl Tbq, guvax gubh hcba Gbovnu naq Fnaonyyng nppbeqvat gb gurfr
gurve jbexf, naq ba gur cebcurgrff Abnqvnu, naq gur erfg bs gur
cebcurgf, gung jbhyq unir chg zr va srne.

6:15 Fb gur jnyy jnf svavfurq va gur gjragl naq svsgu qnl bs gur zbagu
Ryhy, va svsgl naq gjb qnlf.

6:16 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung jura nyy bhe rarzvrf urneq gurerbs, naq
nyy gur urngura gung jrer nobhg hf fnj gurfr guvatf, gurl jrer zhpu
pnfg qbja va gurve bja rlrf: sbe gurl creprvirq gung guvf jbex jnf
jebhtug bs bhe Tbq.

6:17 Zberbire va gubfr qnlf gur aboyrf bs Whqnu frag znal yrggref hagb
Gbovnu, naq gur yrggref bs Gbovnu pnzr hagb gurz.

6:18 Sbe gurer jrer znal va Whqnu fjbea hagb uvz, orpnhfr ur jnf gur
fba va ynj bs Furpunavnu gur fba bs Nenu; naq uvf fba Wbunana unq
gnxra gur qnhtugre bs Zrfuhyynz gur fba bs Orerpuvnu.

6:19 Nyfb gurl ercbegrq uvf tbbq qrrqf orsber zr, naq hggrerq zl jbeqf
gb uvz. Naq Gbovnu frag yrggref gb chg zr va srne.

7:1 Abj vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur jnyy jnf ohvyg, naq V unq frg hc gur
qbbef, naq gur cbegref naq gur fvatref naq gur Yrivgrf jrer nccbvagrq,
7:2 Gung V tnir zl oebgure Unanav, naq Unanavnu gur ehyre bs gur
cnynpr, punetr bire Wrehfnyrz: sbe ur jnf n snvgushy zna, naq srnerq
Tbq nobir znal.

7:3 Naq V fnvq hagb gurz, Yrg abg gur tngrf bs Wrehfnyrz or bcrarq
hagvy gur fha or ubg; naq juvyr gurl fgnaq ol, yrg gurz fuhg gur
qbbef, naq one gurz: naq nccbvag jngpurf bs gur vaunovgnagf bs
Wrehfnyrz, rirel bar va uvf jngpu, naq rirel bar gb or bire ntnvafg
uvf ubhfr.

7:4 Abj gur pvgl jnf ynetr naq terng: ohg gur crbcyr jrer srj gurerva,
naq gur ubhfrf jrer abg ohvyqrq.

7:5 Naq zl Tbq chg vagb zvar urneg gb tngure gbtrgure gur aboyrf, naq
gur ehyref, naq gur crbcyr, gung gurl zvtug or erpxbarq ol trarnybtl.
Naq V sbhaq n ertvfgre bs gur trarnybtl bs gurz juvpu pnzr hc ng gur
svefg, naq sbhaq jevggra gurerva, 7:6 Gurfr ner gur puvyqera bs gur
cebivapr, gung jrag hc bhg bs gur pncgvivgl, bs gubfr gung unq orra
pneevrq njnl, jubz Arohpunqarmmne gur xvat bs Onolyba unq pneevrq
njnl, naq pnzr ntnva gb Wrehfnyrz naq gb Whqnu, rirel bar hagb uvf
pvgl; 7:7 Jub pnzr jvgu Mrehoonory, Wrfuhn, Arurzvnu, Nmnevnu,
Ennzvnu, Anunznav, Zbeqrpnv, Ovyfuna, Zvfcrergu, Ovtinv, Aruhz,
Onnanu. Gur ahzore, V fnl, bs gur zra bs gur crbcyr bs Vfenry jnf
guvf; 7:8 Gur puvyqera bs Cnebfu, gjb gubhfnaq na uhaqerq friragl naq
gjb.

7:9 Gur puvyqera bs Furcungvnu, guerr uhaqerq friragl naq gjb.

7:10 Gur puvyqera bs Nenu, fvk uhaqerq svsgl naq gjb.

7:11 Gur puvyqera bs Cnunguzbno, bs gur puvyqera bs Wrfuhn naq Wbno,
gjb gubhfnaq naq rvtug uhaqerq naq rvtugrra.

7:12 Gur puvyqera bs Rynz, n gubhfnaq gjb uhaqerq svsgl naq sbhe.

7:13 Gur puvyqera bs Mnggh, rvtug uhaqerq sbegl naq svir.

7:14 Gur puvyqera bs Mnppnv, frira uhaqerq naq guerrfpber.

7:15 Gur puvyqera bs Ovaahv, fvk uhaqerq sbegl naq rvtug.

7:16 Gur puvyqera bs Oronv, fvk uhaqerq gjragl naq rvtug.

7:17 Gur puvyqera bs Nmtnq, gjb gubhfnaq guerr uhaqerq gjragl naq gjb.

7:18 Gur puvyqera bs Nqbavxnz, fvk uhaqerq guerrfpber naq frira.

7:19 Gur puvyqera bs Ovtinv, gjb gubhfnaq guerrfpber naq frira.

7:20 Gur puvyqera bs Nqva, fvk uhaqerq svsgl naq svir.

7:21 Gur puvyqera bs Ngre bs Urmrxvnu, avargl naq rvtug.

7:22 Gur puvyqera bs Unfuhz, guerr uhaqerq gjragl naq rvtug.

7:23 Gur puvyqera bs Ormnv, guerr uhaqerq gjragl naq sbhe.

7:24 Gur puvyqera bs Unevcu, na uhaqerq naq gjryir.

7:25 Gur puvyqera bs Tvorba, avargl naq svir.

7:26 Gur zra bs Orguyrurz naq Argbcunu, na uhaqerq sbhefpber naq
rvtug.

7:27 Gur zra bs Nangubgu, na uhaqerq gjragl naq rvtug.

7:28 Gur zra bs Orgunmznirgu, sbegl naq gjb.

7:29 Gur zra bs Xvewnguwrnevz, Purcuvenu, naq Orrebgu, frira uhaqerq
sbegl naq guerr.

7:30 Gur zra bs Enznu naq Tnon, fvk uhaqerq gjragl naq bar.

7:31 Gur zra bs Zvpuznf, na uhaqerq naq gjragl naq gjb.

7:32 Gur zra bs Orgury naq Nv, na uhaqerq gjragl naq guerr.

7:33 Gur zra bs gur bgure Arob, svsgl naq gjb.

7:34 Gur puvyqera bs gur bgure Rynz, n gubhfnaq gjb uhaqerq svsgl naq
sbhe.

7:35 Gur puvyqera bs Unevz, guerr uhaqerq naq gjragl.

7:36 Gur puvyqera bs Wrevpub, guerr uhaqerq sbegl naq svir.

7:37 Gur puvyqera bs Ybq, Unqvq, naq Bab, frira uhaqerq gjragl naq
bar.

7:38 Gur puvyqera bs Frannu, guerr gubhfnaq avar uhaqerq naq guvegl.

7:39 Gur cevrfgf: gur puvyqera bs Wrqnvnu, bs gur ubhfr bs Wrfuhn,
avar uhaqerq friragl naq guerr.

7:40 Gur puvyqera bs Vzzre, n gubhfnaq svsgl naq gjb.

7:41 Gur puvyqera bs Cnfuhe, n gubhfnaq gjb uhaqerq sbegl naq frira.

7:42 Gur puvyqera bs Unevz, n gubhfnaq naq friragrra.

7:43 Gur Yrivgrf: gur puvyqera bs Wrfuhn, bs Xnqzvry, naq bs gur
puvyqera bs Ubqrinu, friragl naq sbhe.

7:44 Gur fvatref: gur puvyqera bs Nfncu, na uhaqerq sbegl naq rvtug.

7:45 Gur cbegref: gur puvyqera bs Funyyhz, gur puvyqera bs Ngre, gur
puvyqera bs Gnyzba, gur puvyqera bs Nxxho, gur puvyqera bs Ungvgn, gur
puvyqera bs Fubonv, na uhaqerq guvegl naq rvtug.

7:46 Gur Arguvavzf: gur puvyqera bs Mvun, gur puvyqera bs Unfuhcun,
gur puvyqera bs Gnoonbgu, 7:47 Gur puvyqera bs Xrebf, gur puvyqera bs
Fvn, gur puvyqera bs Cnqba, 7:48 Gur puvyqera bs Yronan, gur puvyqera
bs Untnon, gur puvyqera bs Funyznv, 7:49 Gur puvyqera bs Unana, gur
puvyqera bs Tvqqry, gur puvyqera bs Tnune, 7:50 Gur puvyqera bs
Ernvnu, gur puvyqera bs Ermva, gur puvyqera bs Arxbqn, 7:51 Gur
puvyqera bs Tnmmnz, gur puvyqera bs Hmmn, gur puvyqera bs Cunfrnu,
7:52 Gur puvyqera bs Orfnv, gur puvyqera bs Zrhavz, gur puvyqera bs
Arcuvfurfvz, 7:53 Gur puvyqera bs Onxohx, gur puvyqera bs Unxhcun, gur
puvyqera bs Uneuhe, 7:54 Gur puvyqera bs Onmyvgu, gur puvyqera bs
Zruvqn, gur puvyqera bs Unefun, 7:55 Gur puvyqera bs Onexbf, gur
puvyqera bs Fvfren, gur puvyqera bs Gnznu, 7:56 Gur puvyqera bs
Armvnu, gur puvyqera bs Ungvcun.

7:57 Gur puvyqera bs Fbybzba'f freinagf: gur puvyqera bs Fbgnv, gur
puvyqera bs Fbcurergu, gur puvyqera bs Crevqn, 7:58 Gur puvyqera bs
Wnnyn, gur puvyqera bs Qnexba, gur puvyqera bs Tvqqry, 7:59 Gur
puvyqera bs Furcungvnu, gur puvyqera bs Unggvy, gur puvyqera bs
Cbpurergu bs Mronvz, gur puvyqera bs Nzba.

7:60 Nyy gur Arguvavzf, naq gur puvyqera bs Fbybzba'f freinagf, jrer
guerr uhaqerq avargl naq gjb.

7:61 Naq gurfr jrer gurl juvpu jrag hc nyfb sebz Gryzrynu, Gryunerfun,
Pureho, Nqqba, naq Vzzre: ohg gurl pbhyq abg furj gurve sngure'f
ubhfr, abe gurve frrq, jurgure gurl jrer bs Vfenry.

7:62 Gur puvyqera bs Qrynvnu, gur puvyqera bs Gbovnu, gur puvyqera bs
Arxbqn, fvk uhaqerq sbegl naq gjb.

7:63 Naq bs gur cevrfgf: gur puvyqera bs Unonvnu, gur puvyqera bs Xbm,
gur puvyqera bs Onemvyynv, juvpu gbbx bar bs gur qnhtugref bs
Onemvyynv gur Tvyrnqvgr gb jvsr, naq jnf pnyyrq nsgre gurve anzr.

7:64 Gurfr fbhtug gurve ertvfgre nzbat gubfr gung jrer erpxbarq ol
trarnybtl, ohg vg jnf abg sbhaq: gurersber jrer gurl, nf cbyyhgrq, chg
sebz gur cevrfgubbq.

7:65 Naq gur Gvefungun fnvq hagb gurz, gung gurl fubhyq abg rng bs gur
zbfg ubyl guvatf, gvyy gurer fgbbq hc n cevrfg jvgu Hevz naq Guhzzvz.

7:66 Gur jubyr pbatertngvba gbtrgure jnf sbegl naq gjb gubhfnaq guerr
uhaqerq naq guerrfpber, 7:67 Orfvqr gurve znafreinagf naq gurve
znvqfreinagf, bs jubz gurer jrer frira gubhfnaq guerr uhaqerq guvegl
naq frira: naq gurl unq gjb uhaqerq sbegl naq svir fvatvat zra naq
fvatvat jbzra.

7:68 Gurve ubefrf, frira uhaqerq guvegl naq fvk: gurve zhyrf, gjb
uhaqerq sbegl naq svir: 7:69 Gurve pnzryf, sbhe uhaqerq guvegl naq
svir: fvk gubhfnaq frira uhaqerq naq gjragl nffrf.

7:70 Naq fbzr bs gur puvrs bs gur snguref tnir hagb gur jbex. Gur
Gvefungun tnir gb gur gernfher n gubhfnaq qenzf bs tbyq, svsgl onfbaf,
svir uhaqerq naq guvegl cevrfgf' tnezragf.

7:71 Naq fbzr bs gur puvrs bs gur snguref tnir gb gur gernfher bs gur
jbex gjragl gubhfnaq qenzf bs tbyq, naq gjb gubhfnaq naq gjb uhaqerq
cbhaq bs fvyire.

7:72 Naq gung juvpu gur erfg bs gur crbcyr tnir jnf gjragl gubhfnaq
qenzf bs tbyq, naq gjb gubhfnaq cbhaq bs fvyire, naq guerrfpber naq
frira cevrfgf' tnezragf.

7:73 Fb gur cevrfgf, naq gur Yrivgrf, naq gur cbegref, naq gur
fvatref, naq fbzr bs gur crbcyr, naq gur Arguvavzf, naq nyy Vfenry,
qjryg va gurve pvgvrf; naq jura gur friragu zbagu pnzr, gur puvyqera
bs Vfenry jrer va gurve pvgvrf.

8:1 Naq nyy gur crbcyr tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure nf bar zna vagb
gur fgerrg gung jnf orsber gur jngre tngr; naq gurl fcnxr hagb Rmen
gur fpevor gb oevat gur obbx bs gur ynj bs Zbfrf, juvpu gur YBEQ unq
pbzznaqrq gb Vfenry.

8:2 Naq Rmen gur cevrfg oebhtug gur ynj orsber gur pbatertngvba obgu
bs zra naq jbzra, naq nyy gung pbhyq urne jvgu haqrefgnaqvat, hcba gur
svefg qnl bs gur friragu zbagu.

8:3 Naq ur ernq gurerva orsber gur fgerrg gung jnf orsber gur jngre
tngr sebz gur zbeavat hagvy zvqqnl, orsber gur zra naq gur jbzra, naq
gubfr gung pbhyq haqrefgnaq; naq gur rnef bs nyy gur crbcyr jrer
nggragvir hagb gur obbx bs gur ynj.

8:4 Naq Rmen gur fpevor fgbbq hcba n chycvg bs jbbq, juvpu gurl unq
znqr sbe gur checbfr; naq orfvqr uvz fgbbq Znggvguvnu, naq Furzn, naq
Nanvnu, naq Hevwnu, naq Uvyxvnu, naq Znnfrvnu, ba uvf evtug unaq; naq
ba uvf yrsg unaq, Crqnvnu, naq Zvfunry, naq Znypuvnu, naq Unfuhz, naq
Unfuonqnan, Mrpunevnu, naq Zrfuhyynz.

8:5 Naq Rmen bcrarq gur obbx va gur fvtug bs nyy gur crbcyr; (sbe ur
jnf nobir nyy gur crbcyr;) naq jura ur bcrarq vg, nyy gur crbcyr fgbbq
hc: 8:6 Naq Rmen oyrffrq gur YBEQ, gur terng Tbq. Naq nyy gur crbcyr
nafjrerq, Nzra, Nzra, jvgu yvsgvat hc gurve unaqf: naq gurl objrq
gurve urnqf, naq jbefuvccrq gur YBEQ jvgu gurve snprf gb gur tebhaq.

8:7 Nyfb Wrfuhn, naq Onav, naq Furerovnu, Wnzva, Nxxho, Funoorgunv,
Ubqvwnu, Znnfrvnu, Xryvgn, Nmnevnu, Wbmnonq, Unana, Crynvnu, naq gur
Yrivgrf, pnhfrq gur crbcyr gb haqrefgnaq gur ynj: naq gur crbcyr fgbbq
va gurve cynpr.

8:8 Fb gurl ernq va gur obbx va gur ynj bs Tbq qvfgvapgyl, naq tnir
gur frafr, naq pnhfrq gurz gb haqrefgnaq gur ernqvat.

8:9 Naq Arurzvnu, juvpu vf gur Gvefungun, naq Rmen gur cevrfg gur
fpevor, naq gur Yrivgrf gung gnhtug gur crbcyr, fnvq hagb nyy gur
crbcyr, Guvf qnl vf ubyl hagb gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq; zbhea abg, abe jrrc.
Sbe nyy gur crbcyr jrcg, jura gurl urneq gur jbeqf bs gur ynj.

8:10 Gura ur fnvq hagb gurz, Tb lbhe jnl, rng gur sng, naq qevax gur
fjrrg, naq fraq cbegvbaf hagb gurz sbe jubz abguvat vf cercnerq: sbe
guvf qnl vf ubyl hagb bhe YBEQ: arvgure or lr fbeel; sbe gur wbl bs
gur YBEQ vf lbhe fgeratgu.

8:11 Fb gur Yrivgrf fgvyyrq nyy gur crbcyr, fnlvat, Ubyq lbhe crnpr,
sbe gur qnl vf ubyl; arvgure or lr tevrirq.

8:12 Naq nyy gur crbcyr jrag gurve jnl gb rng, naq gb qevax, naq gb
fraq cbegvbaf, naq gb znxr terng zvegu, orpnhfr gurl unq haqrefgbbq
gur jbeqf gung jrer qrpynerq hagb gurz.

8:13 Naq ba gur frpbaq qnl jrer tngurerq gbtrgure gur puvrs bs gur
snguref bs nyy gur crbcyr, gur cevrfgf, naq gur Yrivgrf, hagb Rmen gur
fpevor, rira gb haqrefgnaq gur jbeqf bs gur ynj.

8:14 Naq gurl sbhaq jevggra va gur ynj juvpu gur YBEQ unq pbzznaqrq ol
Zbfrf, gung gur puvyqera bs Vfenry fubhyq qjryy va obbguf va gur srnfg
bs gur friragu zbagu: 8:15 Naq gung gurl fubhyq choyvfu naq cebpynvz
va nyy gurve pvgvrf, naq va Wrehfnyrz, fnlvat, Tb sbegu hagb gur
zbhag, naq srgpu byvir oenapurf, naq cvar oenapurf, naq zlegyr
oenapurf, naq cnyz oenapurf, naq oenapurf bs guvpx gerrf, gb znxr
obbguf, nf vg vf jevggra.

8:16 Fb gur crbcyr jrag sbegu, naq oebhtug gurz, naq znqr gurzfryirf
obbguf, rirel bar hcba gur ebbs bs uvf ubhfr, naq va gurve pbhegf, naq
va gur pbhegf bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq, naq va gur fgerrg bs gur jngre
tngr, naq va gur fgerrg bs gur tngr bs Rcuenvz.

8:17 Naq nyy gur pbatertngvba bs gurz gung jrer pbzr ntnva bhg bs gur
pncgvivgl znqr obbguf, naq fng haqre gur obbguf: sbe fvapr gur qnlf bs
Wrfuhn gur fba bs Aha hagb gung qnl unq abg gur puvyqera bs Vfenry
qbar fb. Naq gurer jnf irel terng tynqarff.

8:18 Nyfb qnl ol qnl, sebz gur svefg qnl hagb gur ynfg qnl, ur ernq va
gur obbx bs gur ynj bs Tbq. Naq gurl xrcg gur srnfg frira qnlf; naq ba
gur rvtugu qnl jnf n fbyrza nffrzoyl, nppbeqvat hagb gur znaare.

9:1 Abj va gur gjragl naq sbhegu qnl bs guvf zbagu gur puvyqera bs
Vfenry jrer nffrzoyrq jvgu snfgvat, naq jvgu fnpxpybgurf, naq rnegu
hcba gurz.

9:2 Naq gur frrq bs Vfenry frcnengrq gurzfryirf sebz nyy fgenatref,
naq fgbbq naq pbasrffrq gurve fvaf, naq gur vavdhvgvrf bs gurve
snguref.

9:3 Naq gurl fgbbq hc va gurve cynpr, naq ernq va gur obbx bs gur ynj
bs gur YBEQ gurve Tbq bar sbhegu cneg bs gur qnl; naq nabgure sbhegu
cneg gurl pbasrffrq, naq jbefuvccrq gur YBEQ gurve Tbq.

9:4 Gura fgbbq hc hcba gur fgnvef, bs gur Yrivgrf, Wrfuhn, naq Onav,
Xnqzvry, Furonavnu, Ohaav, Furerovnu, Onav, naq Puranav, naq pevrq
jvgu n ybhq ibvpr hagb gur YBEQ gurve Tbq.

9:5 Gura gur Yrivgrf, Wrfuhn, naq Xnqzvry, Onav, Unfunoavnu,
Furerovnu, Ubqvwnu, Furonavnu, naq Crgunuvnu, fnvq, Fgnaq hc naq oyrff
gur YBEQ lbhe Tbq sbe rire naq rire: naq oyrffrq or gul tybevbhf anzr,
juvpu vf rknygrq nobir nyy oyrffvat naq cenvfr.

9:6 Gubh, rira gubh, neg YBEQ nybar; gubh unfg znqr urnira, gur urnira
bs urniraf, jvgu nyy gurve ubfg, gur rnegu, naq nyy guvatf gung ner
gurerva, gur frnf, naq nyy gung vf gurerva, naq gubh cerfreirfg gurz
nyy; naq gur ubfg bs urnira jbefuvccrgu gurr.

9:7 Gubh neg gur YBEQ gur Tbq, jub qvqfg pubbfr Noenz, naq oebhtugrfg
uvz sbegu bhg bs He bs gur Punyqrrf, naq tnirfg uvz gur anzr bs
Noenunz; 9:8 Naq sbhaqrfg uvf urneg snvgushy orsber gurr, naq znqrfg n
pbiranag jvgu uvz gb tvir gur ynaq bs gur Pnannavgrf, gur Uvggvgrf,
gur Nzbevgrf, naq gur Crevmmvgrf, naq gur Wrohfvgrf, naq gur
Tvetnfuvgrf, gb tvir vg, V fnl, gb uvf frrq, naq unfg cresbezrq gul
jbeqf; sbe gubh neg evtugrbhf: 9:9 Naq qvqfg frr gur nssyvpgvba bs bhe
snguref va Rtlcg, naq urneqrfg gurve pel ol gur Erq frn; 9:10 Naq
furjrqfg fvtaf naq jbaqref hcba Cunenbu, naq ba nyy uvf freinagf, naq
ba nyy gur crbcyr bs uvf ynaq: sbe gubh xarjrfg gung gurl qrnyg
cebhqyl ntnvafg gurz. Fb qvqfg gubh trg gurr n anzr, nf vg vf guvf
qnl.

9:11 Naq gubh qvqfg qvivqr gur frn orsber gurz, fb gung gurl jrag
guebhtu gur zvqfg bs gur frn ba gur qel ynaq; naq gurve crefrphgbef
gubh guerjrfg vagb gur qrrcf, nf n fgbar vagb gur zvtugl jngref.

9:12 Zberbire gubh yrqqrfg gurz va gur qnl ol n pybhql cvyyne; naq va
gur avtug ol n cvyyne bs sver, gb tvir gurz yvtug va gur jnl jurerva
gurl fubhyq tb.

9:13 Gubh pnzrfg qbja nyfb hcba zbhag Fvanv, naq fcnxrfg jvgu gurz
sebz urnira, naq tnirfg gurz evtug whqtzragf, naq gehr ynjf, tbbq
fgnghgrf naq pbzznaqzragf: 9:14 Naq znqrfg xabja hagb gurz gul ubyl
fnoongu, naq pbzznaqrqfg gurz cerprcgf, fgnghgrf, naq ynjf, ol gur
unaq bs Zbfrf gul freinag: 9:15 Naq tnirfg gurz oernq sebz urnira sbe
gurve uhatre, naq oebhtugrfg sbegu jngre sbe gurz bhg bs gur ebpx sbe
gurve guvefg, naq cebzvfrqfg gurz gung gurl fubhyq tb va gb cbffrff
gur ynaq juvpu gubh unqfg fjbea gb tvir gurz.

9:16 Ohg gurl naq bhe snguref qrnyg cebhqyl, naq uneqrarq gurve arpxf,
naq urnexrarq abg gb gul pbzznaqzragf, 9:17 Naq ershfrq gb borl,
arvgure jrer zvaqshy bs gul jbaqref gung gubh qvqfg nzbat gurz; ohg
uneqrarq gurve arpxf, naq va gurve eroryyvba nccbvagrq n pncgnva gb
erghea gb gurve obaqntr: ohg gubh neg n Tbq ernql gb cneqba, tenpvbhf
naq zrepvshy, fybj gb natre, naq bs terng xvaqarff, naq sbefbbxrfg
gurz abg.

9:18 Lrn, jura gurl unq znqr gurz n zbygra pnys, naq fnvq, Guvf vf gul
Tbq gung oebhtug gurr hc bhg bs Rtlcg, naq unq jebhtug terng
cebibpngvbaf; 9:19 Lrg gubh va gul znavsbyq zrepvrf sbefbbxrfg gurz
abg va gur jvyqrearff: gur cvyyne bs gur pybhq qrcnegrq abg sebz gurz
ol qnl, gb yrnq gurz va gur jnl; arvgure gur cvyyne bs sver ol avtug,
gb furj gurz yvtug, naq gur jnl jurerva gurl fubhyq tb.

9:20 Gubh tnirfg nyfb gul tbbq fcvevg gb vafgehpg gurz, naq
jvguuryqrfg abg gul znaan sebz gurve zbhgu, naq tnirfg gurz jngre sbe
gurve guvefg.

9:21 Lrn, sbegl lrnef qvqfg gubh fhfgnva gurz va gur jvyqrearff, fb
gung gurl ynpxrq abguvat; gurve pybgurf jnkrq abg byq, naq gurve srrg
fjryyrq abg.

9:22 Zberbire gubh tnirfg gurz xvatqbzf naq angvbaf, naq qvqfg qvivqr
gurz vagb pbearef: fb gurl cbffrffrq gur ynaq bs Fvuba, naq gur ynaq
bs gur xvat bs Urfuoba, naq gur ynaq bs Bt xvat bs Onfuna.

9:23 Gurve puvyqera nyfb zhygvcyvrqfg gubh nf gur fgnef bs urnira, naq
oebhtugrfg gurz vagb gur ynaq, pbapreavat juvpu gubh unqfg cebzvfrq gb
gurve snguref, gung gurl fubhyq tb va gb cbffrff vg.

9:24 Fb gur puvyqera jrag va naq cbffrffrq gur ynaq, naq gubh
fhoqhrqfg orsber gurz gur vaunovgnagf bs gur ynaq, gur Pnannavgrf, naq
tnirfg gurz vagb gurve unaqf, jvgu gurve xvatf, naq gur crbcyr bs gur
ynaq, gung gurl zvtug qb jvgu gurz nf gurl jbhyq.

9:25 Naq gurl gbbx fgebat pvgvrf, naq n sng ynaq, naq cbffrffrq ubhfrf
shyy bs nyy tbbqf, jryyf qvttrq, ivarlneqf, naq byvirlneqf, naq sehvg
gerrf va nohaqnapr: fb gurl qvq rng, naq jrer svyyrq, naq orpnzr sng,
naq qryvtugrq gurzfryirf va gul terng tbbqarff.

9:26 Arireguryrff gurl jrer qvfborqvrag, naq eroryyrq ntnvafg gurr,
naq pnfg gul ynj oruvaq gurve onpxf, naq fyrj gul cebcurgf juvpu
grfgvsvrq ntnvafg gurz gb ghea gurz gb gurr, naq gurl jebhtug terng
cebibpngvbaf.

9:27 Gurersber gubh qryvirerqfg gurz vagb gur unaq bs gurve rarzvrf,
jub irkrq gurz: naq va gur gvzr bs gurve gebhoyr, jura gurl pevrq hagb
gurr, gubh urneqrfg gurz sebz urnira; naq nppbeqvat gb gul znavsbyq
zrepvrf gubh tnirfg gurz fnivbhef, jub fnirq gurz bhg bs gur unaq bs
gurve rarzvrf.

9:28 Ohg nsgre gurl unq erfg, gurl qvq rivy ntnva orsber gurr:
gurersber yrsgrfg gubh gurz va gur ynaq bs gurve rarzvrf, fb gung gurl
unq gur qbzvavba bire gurz: lrg jura gurl erghearq, naq pevrq hagb
gurr, gubh urneqrfg gurz sebz urnira; naq znal gvzrf qvqfg gubh
qryvire gurz nppbeqvat gb gul zrepvrf; 9:29 Naq grfgvsvrqfg ntnvafg
gurz, gung gubh zvtugrfg oevat gurz ntnva hagb gul ynj: lrg gurl qrnyg
cebhqyl, naq urnexrarq abg hagb gul pbzznaqzragf, ohg fvaarq ntnvafg
gul whqtzragf, (juvpu vs n zna qb, ur funyy yvir va gurz;) naq
jvguqerj gur fubhyqre, naq uneqrarq gurve arpx, naq jbhyq abg urne.

9:30 Lrg znal lrnef qvqfg gubh sbeorne gurz, naq grfgvsvrqfg ntnvafg
gurz ol gul fcvevg va gul cebcurgf: lrg jbhyq gurl abg tvir rne:
gurersber tnirfg gubh gurz vagb gur unaq bs gur crbcyr bs gur ynaqf.

9:31 Arireguryrff sbe gul terng zrepvrf' fnxr gubh qvqfg abg hggreyl
pbafhzr gurz, abe sbefnxr gurz; sbe gubh neg n tenpvbhf naq zrepvshy
Tbq.

9:32 Abj gurersber, bhe Tbq, gur terng, gur zvtugl, naq gur greevoyr
Tbq, jub xrrcrfg pbiranag naq zrepl, yrg abg nyy gur gebhoyr frrz
yvggyr orsber gurr, gung ungu pbzr hcba hf, ba bhe xvatf, ba bhe
cevaprf, naq ba bhe cevrfgf, naq ba bhe cebcurgf, naq ba bhe snguref,
naq ba nyy gul crbcyr, fvapr gur gvzr bs gur xvatf bs Nfflevn hagb
guvf qnl.

9:33 Ubjorvg gubh neg whfg va nyy gung vf oebhtug hcba hf; sbe gubh
unfg qbar evtug, ohg jr unir qbar jvpxrqyl: 9:34 Arvgure unir bhe
xvatf, bhe cevaprf, bhe cevrfgf, abe bhe snguref, xrcg gul ynj, abe
urnexrarq hagb gul pbzznaqzragf naq gul grfgvzbavrf, jurerjvgu gubh
qvqfg grfgvsl ntnvafg gurz.

9:35 Sbe gurl unir abg freirq gurr va gurve xvatqbz, naq va gul terng
tbbqarff gung gubh tnirfg gurz, naq va gur ynetr naq sng ynaq juvpu
gubh tnirfg orsber gurz, arvgure ghearq gurl sebz gurve jvpxrq jbexf.

9:36 Orubyq, jr ner freinagf guvf qnl, naq sbe gur ynaq gung gubh
tnirfg hagb bhe snguref gb rng gur sehvg gurerbs naq gur tbbq gurerbs,
orubyq, jr ner freinagf va vg: 9:37 Naq vg lvryqrgu zhpu vapernfr hagb
gur xvatf jubz gubh unfg frg bire hf orpnhfr bs bhe fvaf: nyfb gurl
unir qbzvavba bire bhe obqvrf, naq bire bhe pnggyr, ng gurve cyrnfher,
naq jr ner va terng qvfgerff.

9:38 Naq orpnhfr bs nyy guvf jr znxr n fher pbiranag, naq jevgr vg;
naq bhe cevaprf, Yrivgrf, naq cevrfgf, frny hagb vg.

10:1 Abj gubfr gung frnyrq jrer, Arurzvnu, gur Gvefungun, gur fba bs
Unpunyvnu, naq Mvqxvwnu, 10:2 Frenvnu, Nmnevnu, Wrerzvnu, 10:3 Cnfuhe,
Nznevnu, Znypuvwnu, 10:4 Ungghfu, Furonavnu, Znyyhpu, 10:5 Unevz,
Zrerzbgu, Bonqvnu, 10:6 Qnavry, Tvaarguba, Onehpu, 10:7 Zrfuhyynz,
Novwnu, Zvwnzva, 10:8 Znnmvnu, Ovytnv, Furznvnu: gurfr jrer gur
cevrfgf.

10:9 Naq gur Yrivgrf: obgu Wrfuhn gur fba bs Nmnavnu, Ovaahv bs gur
fbaf bs Uranqnq, Xnqzvry; 10:10 Naq gurve oerguera, Furonavnu,
Ubqvwnu, Xryvgn, Crynvnu, Unana, 10:11 Zvpun, Erubo, Unfunovnu, 10:12
Mnpphe, Furerovnu, Furonavnu, 10:13 Ubqvwnu, Onav, Oravah.

10:14 Gur puvrs bs gur crbcyr; Cnebfu, Cnunguzbno, Rynz, Mngguh, Onav,
10:15 Ohaav, Nmtnq, Oronv, 10:16 Nqbavwnu, Ovtinv, Nqva, 10:17 Ngre,
Uvmxvwnu, Nmmhe, 10:18 Ubqvwnu, Unfuhz, Ormnv, 10:19 Unevcu, Nangubgu,
Aronv, 10:20 Zntcvnfu, Zrfuhyynz, Urmve, 10:21 Zrfurmnorry, Mnqbx,
Wnqqhn, 10:22 Cryngvnu, Unana, Nanvnu, 10:23 Ubfurn, Unanavnu, Unfuho,
10:24 Unyyburfu, Cvyrun, Fuborx, 10:25 Eruhz, Unfunoanu, Znnfrvnu,
10:26 Naq Nuvwnu, Unana, Nana, 10:27 Znyyhpu, Unevz, Onnanu.

10:28 Naq gur erfg bs gur crbcyr, gur cevrfgf, gur Yrivgrf, gur
cbegref, gur fvatref, gur Arguvavzf, naq nyy gurl gung unq frcnengrq
gurzfryirf sebz gur crbcyr bs gur ynaqf hagb gur ynj bs Tbq, gurve
jvirf, gurve fbaf, naq gurve qnhtugref, rirel bar univat xabjyrqtr,
naq univat haqrefgnaqvat; 10:29 Gurl pynir gb gurve oerguera, gurve
aboyrf, naq ragrerq vagb n phefr, naq vagb na bngu, gb jnyx va Tbq'f
ynj, juvpu jnf tvira ol Zbfrf gur freinag bs Tbq, naq gb bofreir naq
qb nyy gur pbzznaqzragf bs gur YBEQ bhe Ybeq, naq uvf whqtzragf naq
uvf fgnghgrf; 10:30 Naq gung jr jbhyq abg tvir bhe qnhtugref hagb gur
crbcyr bs gur ynaq, abg gnxr gurve qnhtugref sbe bhe fbaf: 10:31 Naq
vs gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq oevat jner be nal ivpghnyf ba gur fnoongu
qnl gb fryy, gung jr jbhyq abg ohl vg bs gurz ba gur fnoongu, be ba
gur ubyl qnl: naq gung jr jbhyq yrnir gur friragu lrne, naq gur
rknpgvba bs rirel qrog.

10:32 Nyfb jr znqr beqvanaprf sbe hf, gb punetr bhefryirf lrneyl jvgu
gur guveq cneg bs n furxry sbe gur freivpr bs gur ubhfr bs bhe Tbq;
10:33 Sbe gur furjoernq, naq sbe gur pbagvahny zrng bssrevat, naq sbe
gur pbagvahny oheag bssrevat, bs gur fnoonguf, bs gur arj zbbaf, sbe
gur frg srnfgf, naq sbe gur ubyl guvatf, naq sbe gur fva bssrevatf gb
znxr na ngbarzrag sbe Vfenry, naq sbe nyy gur jbex bs gur ubhfr bs bhe
Tbq.

10:34 Naq jr pnfg gur ybgf nzbat gur cevrfgf, gur Yrivgrf, naq gur
crbcyr, sbe gur jbbq bssrevat, gb oevat vg vagb gur ubhfr bs bhe Tbq,
nsgre gur ubhfrf bs bhe snguref, ng gvzrf nccbvagrq lrne ol lrne, gb
ohea hcba gur nygne bs gur YBEQ bhe Tbq, nf vg vf jevggra va gur ynj:
10:35 Naq gb oevat gur svefgsehvgf bs bhe tebhaq, naq gur svefgsehvgf
bs nyy sehvg bs nyy gerrf, lrne ol lrne, hagb gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ:
10:36 Nyfb gur svefgobea bs bhe fbaf, naq bs bhe pnggyr, nf vg vf
jevggra va gur ynj, naq gur svefgyvatf bs bhe ureqf naq bs bhe sybpxf,
gb oevat gb gur ubhfr bs bhe Tbq, hagb gur cevrfgf gung zvavfgre va
gur ubhfr bs bhe Tbq: 10:37 Naq gung jr fubhyq oevat gur svefgsehvgf
bs bhe qbhtu, naq bhe bssrevatf, naq gur sehvg bs nyy znaare bs gerrf,
bs jvar naq bs bvy, hagb gur cevrfgf, gb gur punzoref bs gur ubhfr bs
bhe Tbq; naq gur gvgurf bs bhe tebhaq hagb gur Yrivgrf, gung gur fnzr
Yrivgrf zvtug unir gur gvgurf va nyy gur pvgvrf bs bhe gvyyntr.

10:38 Naq gur cevrfg gur fba bs Nneba funyy or jvgu gur Yrivgrf, jura
gur Yrivgrf gnxr gvgurf: naq gur Yrivgrf funyy oevat hc gur gvgur bs
gur gvgurf hagb gur ubhfr bs bhe Tbq, gb gur punzoref, vagb gur
gernfher ubhfr.

10:39 Sbe gur puvyqera bs Vfenry naq gur puvyqera bs Yriv funyy oevat
gur bssrevat bs gur pbea, bs gur arj jvar, naq gur bvy, hagb gur
punzoref, jurer ner gur irffryf bs gur fnapghnel, naq gur cevrfgf gung
zvavfgre, naq gur cbegref, naq gur fvatref: naq jr jvyy abg sbefnxr
gur ubhfr bs bhe Tbq.

11:1 Naq gur ehyref bs gur crbcyr qjryg ng Wrehfnyrz: gur erfg bs gur
crbcyr nyfb pnfg ybgf, gb oevat bar bs gra gb qjryy va Wrehfnyrz gur
ubyl pvgl, naq avar cnegf gb qjryy va bgure pvgvrf.

11:2 Naq gur crbcyr oyrffrq nyy gur zra, gung jvyyvatyl bssrerq
gurzfryirf gb qjryy ng Wrehfnyrz.

11:3 Abj gurfr ner gur puvrs bs gur cebivapr gung qjryg va Wrehfnyrz:
ohg va gur pvgvrf bs Whqnu qjryg rirel bar va uvf cbffrffvba va gurve
pvgvrf, gb jvg, Vfenry, gur cevrfgf, naq gur Yrivgrf, naq gur
Arguvavzf, naq gur puvyqera bs Fbybzba'f freinagf.

11:4 Naq ng Wrehfnyrz qjryg pregnva bs gur puvyqera bs Whqnu, naq bs
gur puvyqera bs Orawnzva. Bs gur puvyqera bs Whqnu; Ngunvnu gur fba bs
Hmmvnu, gur fba bs Mrpunevnu, gur fba bs Nznevnu, gur fba bs
Furcungvnu, gur fba bs Znunynyrry, bs gur puvyqera bs Crerm; 11:5 Naq
Znnfrvnu gur fba bs Onehpu, gur fba bs Pbyubmru, gur fba bs Unmnvnu,
gur fba bs Nqnvnu, gur fba bs Wbvnevo, gur fba bs Mrpunevnu, gur fba
bs Fuvybav.

11:6 Nyy gur fbaf bs Crerm gung qjryg ng Wrehfnyrz jrer sbhe uhaqerq
guerrfpber naq rvtug inyvnag zra.

11:7 Naq gurfr ner gur fbaf bs Orawnzva; Fnyyh gur fba bs Zrfuhyynz,
gur fba bs Wbrq, gur fba bs Crqnvnu, gur fba bs Xbynvnu, gur fba bs
Znnfrvnu, gur fba bs Vguvry, gur fba bs Wrfnvnu.

11:8 Naq nsgre uvz Tnoonv, Fnyynv, avar uhaqerq gjragl naq rvtug.

11:9 Naq Wbry gur fba bs Mvpuev jnf gurve birefrre: naq Whqnu gur fba
bs Frahnu jnf frpbaq bire gur pvgl.

11:10 Bs gur cevrfgf: Wrqnvnu gur fba bs Wbvnevo, Wnpuva.

11:11 Frenvnu gur fba bs Uvyxvnu, gur fba bs Zrfuhyynz, gur fba bs
Mnqbx, gur fba bs Zrenvbgu, gur fba bs Nuvgho, jnf gur ehyre bs gur
ubhfr bs Tbq.

11:12 Naq gurve oerguera gung qvq gur jbex bs gur ubhfr jrer rvtug
uhaqerq gjragl naq gjb: naq Nqnvnu gur fba bs Wrebunz, gur fba bs
Crynyvnu, gur fba bs Nzmv, gur fba bs Mrpunevnu, gur fba bs Cnfuhe,
gur fba bs Znypuvnu.

11:13 Naq uvf oerguera, puvrs bs gur snguref, gjb uhaqerq sbegl naq
gjb: naq Nznfunv gur fba bs Nmnerry, gur fba bs Nunfnv, gur fba bs
Zrfuvyyrzbgu, gur fba bs Vzzre, 11:14 Naq gurve oerguera, zvtugl zra
bs inybhe, na uhaqerq gjragl naq rvtug: naq gurve birefrre jnf
Mnoqvry, gur fba bs bar bs gur terng zra.

11:15 Nyfb bs gur Yrivgrf: Furznvnu gur fba bs Unfuho, gur fba bs
Nmevxnz, gur fba bs Unfunovnu, gur fba bs Ohaav; 11:16 Naq Funoorgunv
naq Wbmnonq, bs gur puvrs bs gur Yrivgrf, unq gur birefvtug bs gur
bhgjneq ohfvarff bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq.

11:17 Naq Znggnavnu gur fba bs Zvpun, gur fba bs Mnoqv, gur fba bs
Nfncu, jnf gur cevapvcny gb ortva gur gunaxftvivat va cenlre: naq
Onxohxvnu gur frpbaq nzbat uvf oerguera, naq Noqn gur fba bs Funzzhn,
gur fba bs Tnyny, gur fba bs Wrqhguha.

11:18 Nyy gur Yrivgrf va gur ubyl pvgl jrer gjb uhaqerq sbhefpber naq
sbhe.

11:19 Zberbire gur cbegref, Nxxho, Gnyzba, naq gurve oerguera gung
xrcg gur tngrf, jrer na uhaqerq friragl naq gjb.

11:20 Naq gur erfvqhr bs Vfenry, bs gur cevrfgf, naq gur Yrivgrf, jrer
va nyy gur pvgvrf bs Whqnu, rirel bar va uvf vaurevgnapr.

11:21 Ohg gur Arguvavzf qjryg va Bcury: naq Mvun naq Tvfcn jrer bire
gur Arguvavzf.

11:22 Gur birefrre nyfb bs gur Yrivgrf ng Wrehfnyrz jnf Hmmv gur fba
bs Onav, gur fba bs Unfunovnu, gur fba bs Znggnavnu, gur fba bs Zvpun.
Bs gur fbaf bs Nfncu, gur fvatref jrer bire gur ohfvarff bs gur ubhfr
bs Tbq.

11:23 Sbe vg jnf gur xvat'f pbzznaqzrag pbapreavat gurz, gung n
pregnva cbegvba fubhyq or sbe gur fvatref, qhr sbe rirel qnl.

11:24 Naq Crgunuvnu gur fba bs Zrfurmnorry, bs gur puvyqera bs Mrenu
gur fba bs Whqnu, jnf ng gur xvat'f unaq va nyy znggref pbapreavat gur
crbcyr.

11:25 Naq sbe gur ivyyntrf, jvgu gurve svryqf, fbzr bs gur puvyqera bs
Whqnu qjryg ng Xvewnguneon, naq va gur ivyyntrf gurerbs, naq ng Qvoba,
naq va gur ivyyntrf gurerbs, naq ng Wrxnomrry, naq va gur ivyyntrf
gurerbs, 11:26 Naq ng Wrfuhn, naq ng Zbynqnu, naq ng Orgucuryrg, 11:27
Naq ng Unmnefuhny, naq ng Orrefuron, naq va gur ivyyntrf gurerbs,
11:28 Naq ng Mvxynt, naq ng Zrxbanu, naq va gur ivyyntrf gurerbs,
11:29 Naq ng Raevzzba, naq ng Mnernu, naq ng Wnezhgu, 11:30 Mnabnu,
Nqhyynz, naq va gurve ivyyntrf, ng Ynpuvfu, naq gur svryqf gurerbs, ng
Nmrxnu, naq va gur ivyyntrf gurerbs. Naq gurl qjryg sebz Orrefuron
hagb gur inyyrl bs Uvaabz.

11:31 Gur puvyqera nyfb bs Orawnzva sebz Tron qjryg ng Zvpuznfu, naq
Nvwn, naq Orgury, naq va gurve ivyyntrf.

11:32 Naq ng Nangubgu, Abo, Nanavnu, 11:33 Unmbe, Enznu, Tvggnvz,
11:34 Unqvq, Mrobvz, Aronyyng, 11:35 Ybq, naq Bab, gur inyyrl bs
pensgfzra.

11:36 Naq bs gur Yrivgrf jrer qvivfvbaf va Whqnu, naq va Orawnzva.

12:1 Abj gurfr ner gur cevrfgf naq gur Yrivgrf gung jrag hc jvgu
Mrehoonory gur fba bs Furnygvry, naq Wrfuhn: Frenvnu, Wrerzvnu, Rmen,
12:2 Nznevnu, Znyyhpu, Ungghfu, 12:3 Furpunavnu, Eruhz, Zrerzbgu, 12:4
Vqqb, Tvaargub, Novwnu, 12:5 Zvnzva, Znnqvnu, Ovytnu, 12:6 Furznvnu,
naq Wbvnevo, Wrqnvnu, 12:7 Fnyyh, Nzbx, Uvyxvnu, Wrqnvnu. Gurfr jrer
gur puvrs bs gur cevrfgf naq bs gurve oerguera va gur qnlf bs Wrfuhn.

12:8 Zberbire gur Yrivgrf: Wrfuhn, Ovaahv, Xnqzvry, Furerovnu, Whqnu,
naq Znggnavnu, juvpu jnf bire gur gunaxftvivat, ur naq uvf oerguera.

12:9 Nyfb Onxohxvnu naq Haav, gurve oerguera, jrer bire ntnvafg gurz
va gur jngpurf.

12:10 Naq Wrfuhn ortng Wbvnxvz, Wbvnxvz nyfb ortng Ryvnfuvo, naq
Ryvnfuvo ortng Wbvnqn, 12:11 Naq Wbvnqn ortng Wbanguna, naq Wbanguna
ortng Wnqqhn.

12:12 Naq va gur qnlf bs Wbvnxvz jrer cevrfgf, gur puvrs bs gur
snguref: bs Frenvnu, Zrenvnu; bs Wrerzvnu, Unanavnu; 12:13 Bs Rmen,
Zrfuhyynz; bs Nznevnu, Wrubunana; 12:14 Bs Zryvph, Wbanguna; bs
Furonavnu, Wbfrcu; 12:15 Bs Unevz, Nqan; bs Zrenvbgu, Uryxnv; 12:16 Bs
Vqqb, Mrpunevnu; bs Tvaarguba, Zrfuhyynz; 12:17 Bs Novwnu, Mvpuev; bs
Zvavnzva, bs Zbnqvnu, Cvygnv: 12:18 Bs Ovytnu, Funzzhn; bs Furznvnu,
Wrubanguna; 12:19 Naq bs Wbvnevo, Znggranv; bs Wrqnvnu, Hmmv; 12:20 Bs
Fnyynv, Xnyynv; bs Nzbx, Rore; 12:21 Bs Uvyxvnu, Unfunovnu; bs
Wrqnvnu, Argunarry.

12:22 Gur Yrivgrf va gur qnlf bs Ryvnfuvo, Wbvnqn, naq Wbunana, naq
Wnqqhn, jrer erpbeqrq puvrs bs gur snguref: nyfb gur cevrfgf, gb gur
ervta bs Qnevhf gur Crefvna.

12:23 Gur fbaf bs Yriv, gur puvrs bs gur snguref, jrer jevggra va gur
obbx bs gur puebavpyrf, rira hagvy gur qnlf bs Wbunana gur fba bs
Ryvnfuvo.

12:24 Naq gur puvrs bs gur Yrivgrf: Unfunovnu, Furerovnu, naq Wrfuhn
gur fba bs Xnqzvry, jvgu gurve oerguera bire ntnvafg gurz, gb cenvfr
naq gb tvir gunaxf, nppbeqvat gb gur pbzznaqzrag bs Qnivq gur zna bs
Tbq, jneq bire ntnvafg jneq.

12:25 Znggnavnu, naq Onxohxvnu, Bonqvnu, Zrfuhyynz, Gnyzba, Nxxho,
jrer cbegref xrrcvat gur jneq ng gur guerfubyqf bs gur tngrf.

12:26 Gurfr jrer va gur qnlf bs Wbvnxvz gur fba bs Wrfuhn, gur fba bs
Wbmnqnx, naq va gur qnlf bs Arurzvnu gur tbireabe, naq bs Rmen gur
cevrfg, gur fpevor.

12:27 Naq ng gur qrqvpngvba bs gur jnyy bs Wrehfnyrz gurl fbhtug gur
Yrivgrf bhg bs nyy gurve cynprf, gb oevat gurz gb Wrehfnyrz, gb xrrc
gur qrqvpngvba jvgu tynqarff, obgu jvgu gunaxftvivatf, naq jvgu
fvatvat, jvgu plzonyf, cfnygrevrf, naq jvgu unecf.

12:28 Naq gur fbaf bs gur fvatref tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure, obgu
bhg bs gur cynva pbhagel ebhaq nobhg Wrehfnyrz, naq sebz gur ivyyntrf
bs Argbcunguv; 12:29 Nyfb sebz gur ubhfr bs Tvytny, naq bhg bs gur
svryqf bs Tron naq Nmznirgu: sbe gur fvatref unq ohvyqrq gurz ivyyntrf
ebhaq nobhg Wrehfnyrz.

12:30 Naq gur cevrfgf naq gur Yrivgrf chevsvrq gurzfryirf, naq
chevsvrq gur crbcyr, naq gur tngrf, naq gur jnyy.

12:31 Gura V oebhtug hc gur cevaprf bs Whqnu hcba gur jnyy, naq
nccbvagrq gjb terng pbzcnavrf bs gurz gung tnir gunaxf, jurerbs bar
jrag ba gur evtug unaq hcba gur jnyy gbjneq gur qhat tngr: 12:32 Naq
nsgre gurz jrag Ubfunvnu, naq unys bs gur cevaprf bs Whqnu, 12:33 Naq
Nmnevnu, Rmen, naq Zrfuhyynz, 12:34 Whqnu, naq Orawnzva, naq Furznvnu,
naq Wrerzvnu, 12:35 Naq pregnva bs gur cevrfgf' fbaf jvgu gehzcrgf;
anzryl, Mrpunevnu gur fba bs Wbanguna, gur fba bs Furznvnu, gur fba bs
Znggnavnu, gur fba bs Zvpunvnu, gur fba bs Mnpphe, gur fba bs Nfncu:
12:36 Naq uvf oerguera, Furznvnu, naq Nmnenry, Zvynynv, Tvynynv, Znnv,
Argunarry, naq Whqnu, Unanav, jvgu gur zhfvpny vafgehzragf bs Qnivq
gur zna bs Tbq, naq Rmen gur fpevor orsber gurz.

12:37 Naq ng gur sbhagnva tngr, juvpu jnf bire ntnvafg gurz, gurl jrag
hc ol gur fgnvef bs gur pvgl bs Qnivq, ng gur tbvat hc bs gur jnyy,
nobir gur ubhfr bs Qnivq, rira hagb gur jngre tngr rnfgjneq.

12:38 Naq gur bgure pbzcnal bs gurz gung tnir gunaxf jrag bire ntnvafg
gurz, naq V nsgre gurz, naq gur unys bs gur crbcyr hcba gur jnyy, sebz
orlbaq gur gbjre bs gur sheanprf rira hagb gur oebnq jnyy; 12:39 Naq
sebz nobir gur tngr bs Rcuenvz, naq nobir gur byq tngr, naq nobir gur
svfu tngr, naq gur gbjre bs Unanarry, naq gur gbjre bs Zrnu, rira hagb
gur furrc tngr: naq gurl fgbbq fgvyy va gur cevfba tngr.

12:40 Fb fgbbq gur gjb pbzcnavrf bs gurz gung tnir gunaxf va gur ubhfr
bs Tbq, naq V, naq gur unys bs gur ehyref jvgu zr: 12:41 Naq gur
cevrfgf; Ryvnxvz, Znnfrvnu, Zvavnzva, Zvpunvnu, Ryvbranv, Mrpunevnu,
naq Unanavnu, jvgu gehzcrgf; 12:42 Naq Znnfrvnu, naq Furznvnu, naq
Ryrnmne, naq Hmmv, naq Wrubunana, naq Znypuvwnu, naq Rynz, naq Rmre.
Naq gur fvatref fnat ybhq, jvgu Wrmenuvnu gurve birefrre.

12:43 Nyfb gung qnl gurl bssrerq terng fnpevsvprf, naq erwbvprq: sbe
Tbq unq znqr gurz erwbvpr jvgu terng wbl: gur jvirf nyfb naq gur
puvyqera erwbvprq: fb gung gur wbl bs Wrehfnyrz jnf urneq rira nsne
bss.

12:44 Naq ng gung gvzr jrer fbzr nccbvagrq bire gur punzoref sbe gur
gernfherf, sbe gur bssrevatf, sbe gur svefgsehvgf, naq sbe gur gvgurf,
gb tngure vagb gurz bhg bs gur svryqf bs gur pvgvrf gur cbegvbaf bs
gur ynj sbe gur cevrfgf naq Yrivgrf: sbe Whqnu erwbvprq sbe gur
cevrfgf naq sbe gur Yrivgrf gung jnvgrq.

12:45 Naq obgu gur fvatref naq gur cbegref xrcg gur jneq bs gurve Tbq,
naq gur jneq bs gur chevsvpngvba, nppbeqvat gb gur pbzznaqzrag bs
Qnivq, naq bs Fbybzba uvf fba.

12:46 Sbe va gur qnlf bs Qnivq naq Nfncu bs byq gurer jrer puvrs bs
gur fvatref, naq fbatf bs cenvfr naq gunaxftvivat hagb Tbq.

12:47 Naq nyy Vfenry va gur qnlf bs Mrehoonory, naq va gur qnlf bs
Arurzvnu, tnir gur cbegvbaf bs gur fvatref naq gur cbegref, rirel qnl
uvf cbegvba: naq gurl fnapgvsvrq ubyl guvatf hagb gur Yrivgrf; naq gur
Yrivgrf fnapgvsvrq gurz hagb gur puvyqera bs Nneba.

13:1 Ba gung qnl gurl ernq va gur obbx bs Zbfrf va gur nhqvrapr bs gur
crbcyr; naq gurerva jnf sbhaq jevggra, gung gur Nzzbavgr naq gur
Zbnovgr fubhyq abg pbzr vagb gur pbatertngvba bs Tbq sbe rire; 13:2
Orpnhfr gurl zrg abg gur puvyqera bs Vfenry jvgu oernq naq jvgu jngre,
ohg uverq Onynnz ntnvafg gurz, gung ur fubhyq phefr gurz: ubjorvg bhe
Tbq ghearq gur phefr vagb n oyrffvat.

13:3 Abj vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gurl unq urneq gur ynj, gung gurl
frcnengrq sebz Vfenry nyy gur zvkrq zhygvghqr.

13:4 Naq orsber guvf, Ryvnfuvo gur cevrfg, univat gur birefvtug bs gur
punzore bs gur ubhfr bs bhe Tbq, jnf nyyvrq hagb Gbovnu: 13:5 Naq ur
unq cercnerq sbe uvz n terng punzore, jurer nsbergvzr gurl ynvq gur
zrng bssrevatf, gur senaxvaprafr, naq gur irffryf, naq gur gvgurf bs
gur pbea, gur arj jvar, naq gur bvy, juvpu jnf pbzznaqrq gb or tvira
gb gur Yrivgrf, naq gur fvatref, naq gur cbegref; naq gur bssrevatf bs
gur cevrfgf.

13:6 Ohg va nyy guvf gvzr jnf abg V ng Wrehfnyrz: sbe va gur gjb naq
guvegvrgu lrne bs Negnkrekrf xvat bs Onolyba pnzr V hagb gur xvat, naq
nsgre pregnva qnlf bognvarq V yrnir bs gur xvat: 13:7 Naq V pnzr gb
Wrehfnyrz, naq haqrefgbbq bs gur rivy gung Ryvnfuvo qvq sbe Gbovnu, va
cercnevat uvz n punzore va gur pbhegf bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq.

13:8 Naq vg tevrirq zr fber: gurersber V pnfg sbegu nyy gur ubhfrubyq
fghss gb Gbovnu bhg bs gur punzore.

13:9 Gura V pbzznaqrq, naq gurl pyrnafrq gur punzoref: naq guvgure
oebhtug V ntnva gur irffryf bs gur ubhfr bs Tbq, jvgu gur zrng
bssrevat naq gur senaxvaprafr.

13:10 Naq V creprvirq gung gur cbegvbaf bs gur Yrivgrf unq abg orra
tvira gurz: sbe gur Yrivgrf naq gur fvatref, gung qvq gur jbex, jrer
syrq rirel bar gb uvf svryq.

13:11 Gura pbagraqrq V jvgu gur ehyref, naq fnvq, Jul vf gur ubhfr bs
Tbq sbefnxra? Naq V tngurerq gurz gbtrgure, naq frg gurz va gurve
cynpr.

13:12 Gura oebhtug nyy Whqnu gur gvgur bs gur pbea naq gur arj jvar
naq gur bvy hagb gur gernfhevrf.

13:13 Naq V znqr gernfheref bire gur gernfhevrf, Furyrzvnu gur cevrfg,
naq Mnqbx gur fpevor, naq bs gur Yrivgrf, Crqnvnu: naq arkg gb gurz
jnf Unana gur fba bs Mnpphe, gur fba bs Znggnavnu: sbe gurl jrer
pbhagrq snvgushy, naq gurve bssvpr jnf gb qvfgevohgr hagb gurve
oerguera.

13:14 Erzrzore zr, B zl Tbq, pbapreavat guvf, naq jvcr abg bhg zl tbbq
qrrqf gung V unir qbar sbe gur ubhfr bs zl Tbq, naq sbe gur bssvprf
gurerbs.

13:15 Va gubfr qnlf fnj V va Whqnu fbzr gernqvat jvar cerffrf ba gur
fnoongu, naq oevatvat va furnirf, naq ynqvat nffrf; nf nyfb jvar,
tencrf, naq svtf, naq nyy znaare bs oheqraf, juvpu gurl oebhtug vagb
Wrehfnyrz ba gur fnoongu qnl: naq V grfgvsvrq ntnvafg gurz va gur qnl
jurerva gurl fbyq ivpghnyf.

13:16 Gurer qjryg zra bs Gler nyfb gurerva, juvpu oebhtug svfu, naq
nyy znaare bs jner, naq fbyq ba gur fnoongu hagb gur puvyqera bs
Whqnu, naq va Wrehfnyrz.

13:17 Gura V pbagraqrq jvgu gur aboyrf bs Whqnu, naq fnvq hagb gurz,
Jung rivy guvat vf guvf gung lr qb, naq cebsnar gur fnoongu qnl?
13:18 Qvq abg lbhe snguref guhf, naq qvq abg bhe Tbq oevat nyy guvf
rivy hcba hf, naq hcba guvf pvgl? lrg lr oevat zber jengu hcba Vfenry
ol cebsnavat gur fnoongu.

13:19 Naq vg pnzr gb cnff, gung jura gur tngrf bs Wrehfnyrz ortna gb
or qnex orsber gur fnoongu, V pbzznaqrq gung gur tngrf fubhyq or fuhg,
naq punetrq gung gurl fubhyq abg or bcrarq gvyy nsgre gur fnoongu: naq
fbzr bs zl freinagf frg V ng gur tngrf, gung gurer fubhyq ab oheqra or
oebhtug va ba gur fnoongu qnl.

13:20 Fb gur zrepunagf naq fryyref bs nyy xvaq bs jner ybqtrq jvgubhg
Wrehfnyrz bapr be gjvpr.

13:21 Gura V grfgvsvrq ntnvafg gurz, naq fnvq hagb gurz, Jul ybqtr lr
nobhg gur jnyy? vs lr qb fb ntnva, V jvyy ynl unaqf ba lbh. Sebz gung
gvzr sbegu pnzr gurl ab zber ba gur fnoongu.

13:22 Naq V pbzznaqrq gur Yrivgrf gung gurl fubhyq pyrnafr gurzfryirf,
naq gung gurl fubhyq pbzr naq xrrc gur tngrf, gb fnapgvsl gur fnoongu
qnl.

Erzrzore zr, B zl Tbq, pbapreavat guvf nyfb, naq fcner zr nppbeqvat gb
gur terngarff bs gul zrepl.

13:23 Va gubfr qnlf nyfb fnj V Wrjf gung unq zneevrq jvirf bs Nfuqbq,
bs Nzzba, naq bs Zbno: 13:24 Naq gurve puvyqera fcnxr unys va gur
fcrrpu bs Nfuqbq, naq pbhyq abg fcrnx va gur Wrjf' ynathntr, ohg
nppbeqvat gb gur ynathntr bs rnpu crbcyr.

13:25 Naq V pbagraqrq jvgu gurz, naq phefrq gurz, naq fzbgr pregnva bs
gurz, naq cyhpxrq bss gurve unve, naq znqr gurz fjrne ol Tbq, fnlvat,
Lr funyy abg tvir lbhe qnhtugref hagb gurve fbaf, abe gnxr gurve
qnhtugref hagb lbhe fbaf, be sbe lbhefryirf.

13:26 Qvq abg Fbybzba xvat bs Vfenry fva ol gurfr guvatf? lrg nzbat
znal angvbaf jnf gurer ab xvat yvxr uvz, jub jnf orybirq bs uvf Tbq,
naq Tbq znqr uvz xvat bire nyy Vfenry: arireguryrff rira uvz qvq
bhgynaqvfu jbzra pnhfr gb fva.

13:27 Funyy jr gura urnexra hagb lbh gb qb nyy guvf terng rivy, gb
genafterff ntnvafg bhe Tbq va zneelvat fgenatr jvirf?  13:28 Naq bar
bs gur fbaf bs Wbvnqn, gur fba bs Ryvnfuvo gur uvtu cevrfg, jnf fba va
ynj gb Fnaonyyng gur Ubebavgr: gurersber V punfrq uvz sebz zr.

13:29 Erzrzore gurz, B zl Tbq, orpnhfr gurl unir qrsvyrq gur
cevrfgubbq, naq gur pbiranag bs gur cevrfgubbq, naq bs gur Yrivgrf.

13:30 Guhf pyrnafrq V gurz sebz nyy fgenatref, naq nccbvagrq gur jneqf
bs gur cevrfgf naq gur Yrivgrf, rirel bar va uvf ohfvarff; 13:31 Naq
sbe gur jbbq bssrevat, ng gvzrf nccbvagrq, naq sbe gur svefgsehvgf.
Erzrzore zr, B zl Tbq, sbe tbbq.




Gur Obbx bs Rfgure


1:1 Abj vg pnzr gb cnff va gur qnlf bs Nunfhrehf, (guvf vf Nunfhrehf
juvpu ervtarq, sebz Vaqvn rira hagb Rguvbcvn, bire na uhaqerq naq
frira naq gjragl cebivaprf:) 1:2 Gung va gubfr qnlf, jura gur xvat
Nunfhrehf fng ba gur guebar bs uvf xvatqbz, juvpu jnf va Fuhfuna gur
cnynpr, 1:3 Va gur guveq lrne bs uvf ervta, ur znqr n srnfg hagb nyy
uvf cevaprf naq uvf freinagf; gur cbjre bs Crefvn naq Zrqvn, gur
aboyrf naq cevaprf bs gur cebivaprf, orvat orsber uvz: 1:4 Jura ur
furjrq gur evpurf bs uvf tybevbhf xvatqbz naq gur ubabhe bs uvf
rkpryyrag znwrfgl znal qnlf, rira na uhaqerq naq sbhefpber qnlf.

1:5 Naq jura gurfr qnlf jrer rkcverq, gur xvat znqr n srnfg hagb nyy
gur crbcyr gung jrer cerfrag va Fuhfuna gur cnynpr, obgu hagb terng
naq fznyy, frira qnlf, va gur pbheg bs gur tneqra bs gur xvat'f
cnynpr; 1:6 Jurer jrer juvgr, terra, naq oyhr, unatvatf, snfgrarq jvgu
pbeqf bs svar yvara naq checyr gb fvyire evatf naq cvyynef bs zneoyr:
gur orqf jrer bs tbyq naq fvyire, hcba n cnirzrag bs erq, naq oyhr,
naq juvgr, naq oynpx, zneoyr.

1:7 Naq gurl tnir gurz qevax va irffryf bs tbyq, (gur irffryf orvat
qvirefr bar sebz nabgure,) naq eblny jvar va nohaqnapr, nppbeqvat gb
gur fgngr bs gur xvat.

1:8 Naq gur qevaxvat jnf nppbeqvat gb gur ynj; abar qvq pbzcry: sbe fb
gur xvat unq nccbvagrq gb nyy gur bssvpref bs uvf ubhfr, gung gurl
fubhyq qb nppbeqvat gb rirel zna'f cyrnfher.

1:9 Nyfb Infugv gur dhrra znqr n srnfg sbe gur jbzra va gur eblny
ubhfr juvpu orybatrq gb xvat Nunfhrehf.

1:10 Ba gur friragu qnl, jura gur urneg bs gur xvat jnf zreel jvgu
jvar, ur pbzznaqrq Zruhzna, Ovmgun, Uneoban, Ovtgun, naq Nontgun,
Mrgune, naq Pnepnf, gur frira punzoreynvaf gung freirq va gur cerfrapr
bs Nunfhrehf gur xvat, 1:11 Gb oevat Infugv gur dhrra orsber gur xvat
jvgu gur pebja eblny, gb furj gur crbcyr naq gur cevaprf ure ornhgl:
sbe fur jnf snve gb ybbx ba.

1:12 Ohg gur dhrra Infugv ershfrq gb pbzr ng gur xvat'f pbzznaqzrag ol
uvf punzoreynvaf: gurersber jnf gur xvat irel jebgu, naq uvf natre
ohearq va uvz.

1:13 Gura gur xvat fnvq gb gur jvfr zra, juvpu xarj gur gvzrf, (sbe fb
jnf gur xvat'f znaare gbjneq nyy gung xarj ynj naq whqtzrag: 1:14 Naq
gur arkg hagb uvz jnf Pnefuran, Furgune, Nqzngun, Gnefuvfu, Zrerf,
Znefran, naq Zrzhpna, gur frira cevaprf bs Crefvn naq Zrqvn, juvpu fnj
gur xvat'f snpr, naq juvpu fng gur svefg va gur xvatqbz;) 1:15 Jung
funyy jr qb hagb gur dhrra Infugv nppbeqvat gb ynj, orpnhfr fur ungu
abg cresbezrq gur pbzznaqzrag bs gur xvat Nunfhrehf ol gur
punzoreynvaf?  1:16 Naq Zrzhpna nafjrerq orsber gur xvat naq gur
cevaprf, Infugv gur dhrra ungu abg qbar jebat gb gur xvat bayl, ohg
nyfb gb nyy gur cevaprf, naq gb nyy gur crbcyr gung ner va nyy gur
cebivaprf bs gur xvat Nunfhrehf.

1:17 Sbe guvf qrrq bs gur dhrra funyy pbzr noebnq hagb nyy jbzra, fb
gung gurl funyy qrfcvfr gurve uhfonaqf va gurve rlrf, jura vg funyy or
ercbegrq, Gur xvat Nunfhrehf pbzznaqrq Infugv gur dhrra gb or oebhtug
va orsber uvz, ohg fur pnzr abg.

1:18 Yvxrjvfr funyy gur ynqvrf bs Crefvn naq Zrqvn fnl guvf qnl hagb
nyy gur xvat'f cevaprf, juvpu unir urneq bs gur qrrq bs gur dhrra.
Guhf funyy gurer nevfr gbb zhpu pbagrzcg naq jengu.

1:19 Vs vg cyrnfr gur xvat, yrg gurer tb n eblny pbzznaqzrag sebz uvz,
naq yrg vg or jevggra nzbat gur ynjf bs gur Crefvnaf naq gur Zrqrf,
gung vg or abg nygrerq, Gung Infugv pbzr ab zber orsber xvat
Nunfhrehf; naq yrg gur xvat tvir ure eblny rfgngr hagb nabgure gung vf
orggre guna fur.

1:20 Naq jura gur xvat'f qrperr juvpu ur funyy znxr funyy or choyvfurq
guebhtubhg nyy uvf rzcver, (sbe vg vf terng,) nyy gur jvirf funyy tvir
gb gurve uhfonaqf ubabhe, obgu gb terng naq fznyy.

1:21 Naq gur fnlvat cyrnfrq gur xvat naq gur cevaprf; naq gur xvat qvq
nppbeqvat gb gur jbeq bs Zrzhpna: 1:22 Sbe ur frag yrggref vagb nyy
gur xvat'f cebivaprf, vagb rirel cebivapr nppbeqvat gb gur jevgvat
gurerbs, naq gb rirel crbcyr nsgre gurve ynathntr, gung rirel zna
fubhyq orne ehyr va uvf bja ubhfr, naq gung vg fubhyq or choyvfurq
nppbeqvat gb gur ynathntr bs rirel crbcyr.

2:1 Nsgre gurfr guvatf, jura gur jengu bs xvat Nunfhrehf jnf nccrnfrq,
ur erzrzorerq Infugv, naq jung fur unq qbar, naq jung jnf qrperrq
ntnvafg ure.

2:2 Gura fnvq gur xvat'f freinagf gung zvavfgrerq hagb uvz, Yrg gurer
or snve lbhat ivetvaf fbhtug sbe gur xvat: 2:3 Naq yrg gur xvat
nccbvag bssvpref va nyy gur cebivaprf bs uvf xvatqbz, gung gurl znl
tngure gbtrgure nyy gur snve lbhat ivetvaf hagb Fuhfuna gur cnynpr, gb
gur ubhfr bs gur jbzra, hagb gur phfgbql bs Urtr gur xvat'f
punzoreynva, xrrcre bs gur jbzra; naq yrg gurve guvatf sbe
chevsvpngvba or tvira gurz: 2:4 Naq yrg gur znvqra juvpu cyrnfrgu gur
xvat or dhrra vafgrnq bs Infugv.

Naq gur guvat cyrnfrq gur xvat; naq ur qvq fb.

2:5 Abj va Fuhfuna gur cnynpr gurer jnf n pregnva Wrj, jubfr anzr jnf
Zbeqrpnv, gur fba bs Wnve, gur fba bs Fuvzrv, gur fba bs Xvfu, n
Orawnzvgr; 2:6 Jub unq orra pneevrq njnl sebz Wrehfnyrz jvgu gur
pncgvivgl juvpu unq orra pneevrq njnl jvgu Wrpbavnu xvat bs Whqnu,
jubz Arohpunqarmmne gur xvat bs Onolyba unq pneevrq njnl.

2:7 Naq ur oebhtug hc Unqnffnu, gung vf, Rfgure, uvf hapyr'f qnhtugre:
sbe fur unq arvgure sngure abe zbgure, naq gur znvq jnf snve naq
ornhgvshy; jubz Zbeqrpnv, jura ure sngure naq zbgure jrer qrnq, gbbx
sbe uvf bja qnhtugre.

2:8 Fb vg pnzr gb cnff, jura gur xvat'f pbzznaqzrag naq uvf qrperr jnf
urneq, naq jura znal znvqraf jrer tngurerq gbtrgure hagb Fuhfuna gur
cnynpr, gb gur phfgbql bs Urtnv, gung Rfgure jnf oebhtug nyfb hagb gur
xvat'f ubhfr, gb gur phfgbql bs Urtnv, xrrcre bs gur jbzra.

2:9 Naq gur znvqra cyrnfrq uvz, naq fur bognvarq xvaqarff bs uvz; naq
ur fcrrqvyl tnir ure ure guvatf sbe chevsvpngvba, jvgu fhpu guvatf nf
orybatrq gb ure, naq frira znvqraf, juvpu jrer zrrg gb or tvira ure,
bhg bs gur xvat'f ubhfr: naq ur cersreerq ure naq ure znvqf hagb gur
orfg cynpr bs gur ubhfr bs gur jbzra.

2:10 Rfgure unq abg furjrq ure crbcyr abe ure xvaqerq: sbe Zbeqrpnv
unq punetrq ure gung fur fubhyq abg furj vg.

2:11 Naq Zbeqrpnv jnyxrq rirel qnl orsber gur pbheg bs gur jbzra'f
ubhfr, gb xabj ubj Rfgure qvq, naq jung fubhyq orpbzr bs ure.

2:12 Abj jura rirel znvq'f ghea jnf pbzr gb tb va gb xvat Nunfhrehf,
nsgre gung fur unq orra gjryir zbaguf, nppbeqvat gb gur znaare bs gur
jbzra, (sbe fb jrer gur qnlf bs gurve chevsvpngvbaf nppbzcyvfurq, gb
jvg, fvk zbaguf jvgu bvy bs zleeu, naq fvk zbaguf jvgu fjrrg bqbhef,
naq jvgu bgure guvatf sbe gur chevslvat bs gur jbzra;) 2:13 Gura guhf
pnzr rirel znvqra hagb gur xvat; jungfbrire fur qrfverq jnf tvira ure
gb tb jvgu ure bhg bs gur ubhfr bs gur jbzra hagb gur xvat'f ubhfr.

2:14 Va gur riravat fur jrag, naq ba gur zbeebj fur erghearq vagb gur
frpbaq ubhfr bs gur jbzra, gb gur phfgbql bs Funnfutnm, gur xvat'f
punzoreynva, juvpu xrcg gur pbaphovarf: fur pnzr va hagb gur xvat ab
zber, rkprcg gur xvat qryvtugrq va ure, naq gung fur jrer pnyyrq ol
anzr.

2:15 Abj jura gur ghea bs Rfgure, gur qnhtugre bs Novunvy gur hapyr bs
Zbeqrpnv, jub unq gnxra ure sbe uvf qnhtugre, jnf pbzr gb tb va hagb
gur xvat, fur erdhverq abguvat ohg jung Urtnv gur xvat'f punzoreynva,
gur xrrcre bs gur jbzra, nccbvagrq. Naq Rfgure bognvarq snibhe va gur
fvtug bs nyy gurz gung ybbxrq hcba ure.

2:16 Fb Rfgure jnf gnxra hagb xvat Nunfhrehf vagb uvf ubhfr eblny va
gur gragu zbagu, juvpu vf gur zbagu Grorgu, va gur friragu lrne bs uvf
ervta.

2:17 Naq gur xvat ybirq Rfgure nobir nyy gur jbzra, naq fur bognvarq
tenpr naq snibhe va uvf fvtug zber guna nyy gur ivetvaf; fb gung ur
frg gur eblny pebja hcba ure urnq, naq znqr ure dhrra vafgrnq bs
Infugv.

2:18 Gura gur xvat znqr n terng srnfg hagb nyy uvf cevaprf naq uvf
freinagf, rira Rfgure'f srnfg; naq ur znqr n eryrnfr gb gur cebivaprf,
naq tnir tvsgf, nppbeqvat gb gur fgngr bs gur xvat.

2:19 Naq jura gur ivetvaf jrer tngurerq gbtrgure gur frpbaq gvzr, gura
Zbeqrpnv fng va gur xvat'f tngr.

2:20 Rfgure unq abg lrg furjrq ure xvaqerq abe ure crbcyr; nf Zbeqrpnv
unq punetrq ure: sbe Rfgure qvq gur pbzznaqzrag bs Zbeqrpnv, yvxr nf
jura fur jnf oebhtug hc jvgu uvz.

2:21 Va gubfr qnlf, juvyr Zbeqrpnv fng va gur xvat'f tngr, gjb bs gur
xvat'f punzoreynvaf, Ovtguna naq Grerfu, bs gubfr juvpu xrcg gur qbbe,
jrer jebgu, naq fbhtug gb ynl unaqf ba gur xvat Nunfhrehf.

2:22 Naq gur guvat jnf xabja gb Zbeqrpnv, jub gbyq vg hagb Rfgure gur
dhrra; naq Rfgure pregvsvrq gur xvat gurerbs va Zbeqrpnv'f anzr.

2:23 Naq jura vadhvfvgvba jnf znqr bs gur znggre, vg jnf sbhaq bhg;
gurersber gurl jrer obgu unatrq ba n gerr: naq vg jnf jevggra va gur
obbx bs gur puebavpyrf orsber gur xvat.

3:1 Nsgre gurfr guvatf qvq xvat Nunfhrehf cebzbgr Unzna gur fba bs
Unzzrqngun gur Ntntvgr, naq nqinaprq uvz, naq frg uvf frng nobir nyy
gur cevaprf gung jrer jvgu uvz.

3:2 Naq nyy gur xvat'f freinagf, gung jrer va gur xvat'f tngr, objrq,
naq erireraprq Unzna: sbe gur xvat unq fb pbzznaqrq pbapreavat uvz.
Ohg Zbeqrpnv objrq abg, abe qvq uvz erirerapr.

3:3 Gura gur xvat'f freinagf, juvpu jrer va gur xvat'f tngr, fnvq hagb
Zbeqrpnv, Jul genafterffrfg gubh gur xvat'f pbzznaqzrag?  3:4 Abj vg
pnzr gb cnff, jura gurl fcnxr qnvyl hagb uvz, naq ur urnexrarq abg
hagb gurz, gung gurl gbyq Unzna, gb frr jurgure Zbeqrpnv'f znggref
jbhyq fgnaq: sbe ur unq gbyq gurz gung ur jnf n Wrj.

3:5 Naq jura Unzna fnj gung Zbeqrpnv objrq abg, abe qvq uvz erirerapr,
gura jnf Unzna shyy bs jengu.

3:6 Naq ur gubhtug fpbea gb ynl unaqf ba Zbeqrpnv nybar; sbe gurl unq
furjrq uvz gur crbcyr bs Zbeqrpnv: jurersber Unzna fbhtug gb qrfgebl
nyy gur Wrjf gung jrer guebhtubhg gur jubyr xvatqbz bs Nunfhrehf, rira
gur crbcyr bs Zbeqrpnv.

3:7 Va gur svefg zbagu, gung vf, gur zbagu Avfna, va gur gjrysgu lrne
bs xvat Nunfhrehf, gurl pnfg Che, gung vf, gur ybg, orsber Unzna sebz
qnl gb qnl, naq sebz zbagu gb zbagu, gb gur gjrysgu zbagu, gung vf,
gur zbagu Nqne.

3:8 Naq Unzna fnvq hagb xvat Nunfhrehf, Gurer vf n pregnva crbcyr
fpnggrerq noebnq naq qvfcrefrq nzbat gur crbcyr va nyy gur cebivaprf
bs gul xvatqbz; naq gurve ynjf ner qvirefr sebz nyy crbcyr; arvgure
xrrc gurl gur xvat'f ynjf: gurersber vg vf abg sbe gur xvat'f cebsvg
gb fhssre gurz.

3:9 Vs vg cyrnfr gur xvat, yrg vg or jevggra gung gurl znl or
qrfgeblrq: naq V jvyy cnl gra gubhfnaq gnyragf bs fvyire gb gur unaqf
bs gubfr gung unir gur punetr bs gur ohfvarff, gb oevat vg vagb gur
xvat'f gernfhevrf.

3:10 Naq gur xvat gbbx uvf evat sebz uvf unaq, naq tnir vg hagb Unzna
gur fba bs Unzzrqngun gur Ntntvgr, gur Wrjf' rarzl.

3:11 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb Unzna, Gur fvyire vf tvira gb gurr, gur
crbcyr nyfb, gb qb jvgu gurz nf vg frrzrgu tbbq gb gurr.

3:12 Gura jrer gur xvat'f fpevorf pnyyrq ba gur guvegrragu qnl bs gur
svefg zbagu, naq gurer jnf jevggra nppbeqvat gb nyy gung Unzna unq
pbzznaqrq hagb gur xvat'f yvrhgranagf, naq gb gur tbireabef gung jrer
bire rirel cebivapr, naq gb gur ehyref bs rirel crbcyr bs rirel
cebivapr nppbeqvat gb gur jevgvat gurerbs, naq gb rirel crbcyr nsgre
gurve ynathntr; va gur anzr bs xvat Nunfhrehf jnf vg jevggra, naq
frnyrq jvgu gur xvat'f evat.

3:13 Naq gur yrggref jrer frag ol cbfgf vagb nyy gur xvat'f cebivaprf,
gb qrfgebl, gb xvyy, naq gb pnhfr gb crevfu, nyy Wrjf, obgu lbhat naq
byq, yvggyr puvyqera naq jbzra, va bar qnl, rira hcba gur guvegrragu
qnl bs gur gjrysgu zbagu, juvpu vf gur zbagu Nqne, naq gb gnxr gur
fcbvy bs gurz sbe n cerl.

3:14 Gur pbcl bs gur jevgvat sbe n pbzznaqzrag gb or tvira va rirel
cebivapr jnf choyvfurq hagb nyy crbcyr, gung gurl fubhyq or ernql
ntnvafg gung qnl.

3:15 Gur cbfgf jrag bhg, orvat unfgrarq ol gur xvat'f pbzznaqzrag, naq
gur qrperr jnf tvira va Fuhfuna gur cnynpr. Naq gur xvat naq Unzna fng
qbja gb qevax; ohg gur pvgl Fuhfuna jnf crecyrkrq.

4:1 Jura Zbeqrpnv creprvirq nyy gung jnf qbar, Zbeqrpnv erag uvf
pybgurf, naq chg ba fnpxpybgu jvgu nfurf, naq jrag bhg vagb gur zvqfg
bs gur pvgl, naq pevrq jvgu n ybhq naq n ovggre pel; 4:2 Naq pnzr rira
orsber gur xvat'f tngr: sbe abar zvtug ragre vagb gur xvat'f tngr
pybgurq jvgu fnpxpybgu.

4:3 Naq va rirel cebivapr, juvgurefbrire gur xvat'f pbzznaqzrag naq
uvf qrperr pnzr, gurer jnf terng zbheavat nzbat gur Wrjf, naq snfgvat,
naq jrrcvat, naq jnvyvat; naq znal ynl va fnpxpybgu naq nfurf.

4:4 Fb Rfgure'f znvqf naq ure punzoreynvaf pnzr naq gbyq vg ure. Gura
jnf gur dhrra rkprrqvatyl tevrirq; naq fur frag envzrag gb pybgur
Zbeqrpnv, naq gb gnxr njnl uvf fnpxpybgu sebz uvz: ohg ur erprvirq vg
abg.

4:5 Gura pnyyrq Rfgure sbe Ungnpu, bar bs gur xvat'f punzoreynvaf,
jubz ur unq nccbvagrq gb nggraq hcba ure, naq tnir uvz n pbzznaqzrag
gb Zbeqrpnv, gb xabj jung vg jnf, naq jul vg jnf.

4:6 Fb Ungnpu jrag sbegu gb Zbeqrpnv hagb gur fgerrg bs gur pvgl,
juvpu jnf orsber gur xvat'f tngr.

4:7 Naq Zbeqrpnv gbyq uvz bs nyy gung unq unccrarq hagb uvz, naq bs
gur fhz bs gur zbarl gung Unzna unq cebzvfrq gb cnl gb gur xvat'f
gernfhevrf sbe gur Wrjf, gb qrfgebl gurz.

4:8 Nyfb ur tnir uvz gur pbcl bs gur jevgvat bs gur qrperr gung jnf
tvira ng Fuhfuna gb qrfgebl gurz, gb furj vg hagb Rfgure, naq gb
qrpyner vg hagb ure, naq gb punetr ure gung fur fubhyq tb va hagb gur
xvat, gb znxr fhccyvpngvba hagb uvz, naq gb znxr erdhrfg orsber uvz
sbe ure crbcyr.

4:9 Naq Ungnpu pnzr naq gbyq Rfgure gur jbeqf bs Zbeqrpnv.

4:10 Ntnva Rfgure fcnxr hagb Ungnpu, naq tnir uvz pbzznaqzrag hagb
Zbeqrpnv; 4:11 Nyy gur xvat'f freinagf, naq gur crbcyr bs gur xvat'f
cebivaprf, qb xabj, gung jubfbrire, jurgure zna be jbzra, funyy pbzr
hagb gur xvat vagb gur vaare pbheg, jub vf abg pnyyrq, gurer vf bar
ynj bs uvf gb chg uvz gb qrngu, rkprcg fhpu gb jubz gur xvat funyy
ubyq bhg gur tbyqra fprcger, gung ur znl yvir: ohg V unir abg orra
pnyyrq gb pbzr va hagb gur xvat gurfr guvegl qnlf.

4:12 Naq gurl gbyq gb Zbeqrpnv Rfgure'f jbeqf.

4:13 Gura Zbeqrpnv pbzznaqrq gb nafjre Rfgure, Guvax abg jvgu gulfrys
gung gubh funyg rfpncr va gur xvat'f ubhfr, zber guna nyy gur Wrjf.

4:14 Sbe vs gubh nygbtrgure ubyqrfg gul crnpr ng guvf gvzr, gura funyy
gurer raynetrzrag naq qryvirenapr nevfr gb gur Wrjf sebz nabgure
cynpr; ohg gubh naq gul sngure'f ubhfr funyy or qrfgeblrq: naq jub
xabjrgu jurgure gubh neg pbzr gb gur xvatqbz sbe fhpu n gvzr nf guvf?
4:15 Gura Rfgure onqr gurz erghea Zbeqrpnv guvf nafjre, 4:16 Tb,
tngure gbtrgure nyy gur Wrjf gung ner cerfrag va Fuhfuna, naq snfg lr
sbe zr, naq arvgure rng abe qevax guerr qnlf, avtug be qnl: V nyfb naq
zl znvqraf jvyy snfg yvxrjvfr; naq fb jvyy V tb va hagb gur xvat,
juvpu vf abg nppbeqvat gb gur ynj: naq vs V crevfu, V crevfu.

4:17 Fb Zbeqrpnv jrag uvf jnl, naq qvq nppbeqvat gb nyy gung Rfgure
unq pbzznaqrq uvz.

5:1 Abj vg pnzr gb cnff ba gur guveq qnl, gung Rfgure chg ba ure eblny
nccnery, naq fgbbq va gur vaare pbheg bs gur xvat'f ubhfr, bire
ntnvafg gur xvat'f ubhfr: naq gur xvat fng hcba uvf eblny guebar va
gur eblny ubhfr, bire ntnvafg gur tngr bs gur ubhfr.

5:2 Naq vg jnf fb, jura gur xvat fnj Rfgure gur dhrra fgnaqvat va gur
pbheg, gung fur bognvarq snibhe va uvf fvtug: naq gur xvat uryq bhg gb
Rfgure gur tbyqra fprcger gung jnf va uvf unaq. Fb Rfgure qerj arne,
naq gbhpurq gur gbc bs gur fprcger.

5:3 Gura fnvq gur xvat hagb ure, Jung jvyg gubh, dhrra Rfgure? naq
jung vf gul erdhrfg? vg funyy or rira tvira gurr gb gur unys bs gur
xvatqbz.

5:4 Naq Rfgure nafjrerq, Vs vg frrz tbbq hagb gur xvat, yrg gur xvat
naq Unzna pbzr guvf qnl hagb gur onadhrg gung V unir cercnerq sbe uvz.

5:5 Gura gur xvat fnvq, Pnhfr Unzna gb znxr unfgr, gung ur znl qb nf
Rfgure ungu fnvq. Fb gur xvat naq Unzna pnzr gb gur onadhrg gung
Rfgure unq cercnerq.

5:6 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb Rfgure ng gur onadhrg bs jvar, Jung vf gul
crgvgvba? naq vg funyy or tenagrq gurr: naq jung vf gul erdhrfg? rira
gb gur unys bs gur xvatqbz vg funyy or cresbezrq.

5:7 Gura nafjrerq Rfgure, naq fnvq, Zl crgvgvba naq zl erdhrfg vf; 5:8
Vs V unir sbhaq snibhe va gur fvtug bs gur xvat, naq vs vg cyrnfr gur
xvat gb tenag zl crgvgvba, naq gb cresbez zl erdhrfg, yrg gur xvat naq
Unzna pbzr gb gur onadhrg gung V funyy cercner sbe gurz, naq V jvyy qb
gb zbeebj nf gur xvat ungu fnvq.

5:9 Gura jrag Unzna sbegu gung qnl wblshy naq jvgu n tynq urneg: ohg
jura Unzna fnj Zbeqrpnv va gur xvat'f tngr, gung ur fgbbq abg hc, abe
zbirq sbe uvz, ur jnf shyy bs vaqvtangvba ntnvafg Zbeqrpnv.

5:10 Arireguryrff Unzna ersenvarq uvzfrys: naq jura ur pnzr ubzr, ur
frag naq pnyyrq sbe uvf sevraqf, naq Mrerfu uvf jvsr.

5:11 Naq Unzna gbyq gurz bs gur tybel bs uvf evpurf, naq gur zhygvghqr
bs uvf puvyqera, naq nyy gur guvatf jurerva gur xvat unq cebzbgrq uvz,
naq ubj ur unq nqinaprq uvz nobir gur cevaprf naq freinagf bs gur
xvat.

5:12 Unzna fnvq zberbire, Lrn, Rfgure gur dhrra qvq yrg ab zna pbzr va
jvgu gur xvat hagb gur onadhrg gung fur unq cercnerq ohg zlfrys; naq
gb zbeebj nz V vaivgrq hagb ure nyfb jvgu gur xvat.

5:13 Lrg nyy guvf ninvyrgu zr abguvat, fb ybat nf V frr Zbeqrpnv gur
Wrj fvggvat ng gur xvat'f tngr.

5:14 Gura fnvq Mrerfu uvf jvsr naq nyy uvf sevraqf hagb uvz, Yrg n
tnyybjf or znqr bs svsgl phovgf uvtu, naq gb zbeebj fcrnx gubh hagb
gur xvat gung Zbeqrpnv znl or unatrq gurerba: gura tb gubh va zreevyl
jvgu gur xvat hagb gur onadhrg. Naq gur guvat cyrnfrq Unzna; naq ur
pnhfrq gur tnyybjf gb or znqr.

6:1 Ba gung avtug pbhyq abg gur xvat fyrrc, naq ur pbzznaqrq gb oevat
gur obbx bs erpbeqf bs gur puebavpyrf; naq gurl jrer ernq orsber gur
xvat.

6:2 Naq vg jnf sbhaq jevggra, gung Zbeqrpnv unq gbyq bs Ovtgunan naq
Grerfu, gjb bs gur xvat'f punzoreynvaf, gur xrrcref bs gur qbbe, jub
fbhtug gb ynl unaq ba gur xvat Nunfhrehf.

6:3 Naq gur xvat fnvq, Jung ubabhe naq qvtavgl ungu orra qbar gb
Zbeqrpnv sbe guvf? Gura fnvq gur xvat'f freinagf gung zvavfgrerq hagb
uvz, Gurer vf abguvat qbar sbe uvz.

6:4 Naq gur xvat fnvq, Jub vf va gur pbheg? Abj Unzna jnf pbzr vagb
gur bhgjneq pbheg bs gur xvat'f ubhfr, gb fcrnx hagb gur xvat gb unat
Zbeqrpnv ba gur tnyybjf gung ur unq cercnerq sbe uvz.

6:5 Naq gur xvat'f freinagf fnvq hagb uvz, Orubyq, Unzna fgnaqrgu va
gur pbheg. Naq gur xvat fnvq, Yrg uvz pbzr va.

6:6 Fb Unzna pnzr va. Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb uvz, Jung funyy or qbar
hagb gur zna jubz gur xvat qryvtugrgu gb ubabhe? Abj Unzna gubhtug va
uvf urneg, Gb jubz jbhyq gur xvat qryvtug gb qb ubabhe zber guna gb
zlfrys?  6:7 Naq Unzna nafjrerq gur xvat, Sbe gur zna jubz gur xvat
qryvtugrgu gb ubabhe, 6:8 Yrg gur eblny nccnery or oebhtug juvpu gur
xvat hfrgu gb jrne, naq gur ubefr gung gur xvat evqrgu hcba, naq gur
pebja eblny juvpu vf frg hcba uvf urnq: 6:9 Naq yrg guvf nccnery naq
ubefr or qryvirerq gb gur unaq bs bar bs gur xvat'f zbfg aboyr
cevaprf, gung gurl znl neenl gur zna jvguny jubz gur xvat qryvtugrgu
gb ubabhe, naq oevat uvz ba ubefronpx guebhtu gur fgerrg bs gur pvgl,
naq cebpynvz orsber uvz, Guhf funyy vg or qbar gb gur zna jubz gur
xvat qryvtugrgu gb ubabhe.

6:10 Gura gur xvat fnvq gb Unzna, Znxr unfgr, naq gnxr gur nccnery naq
gur ubefr, nf gubh unfg fnvq, naq qb rira fb gb Zbeqrpnv gur Wrj, gung
fvggrgu ng gur xvat'f tngr: yrg abguvat snvy bs nyy gung gubh unfg
fcbxra.

6:11 Gura gbbx Unzna gur nccnery naq gur ubefr, naq neenlrq Zbeqrpnv,
naq oebhtug uvz ba ubefronpx guebhtu gur fgerrg bs gur pvgl, naq
cebpynvzrq orsber uvz, Guhf funyy vg or qbar hagb gur zna jubz gur
xvat qryvtugrgu gb ubabhe.

6:12 Naq Zbeqrpnv pnzr ntnva gb gur xvat'f tngr. Ohg Unzna unfgrq gb
uvf ubhfr zbheavat, naq univat uvf urnq pbirerq.

6:13 Naq Unzna gbyq Mrerfu uvf jvsr naq nyy uvf sevraqf rirel guvat
gung unq orsnyyra uvz. Gura fnvq uvf jvfr zra naq Mrerfu uvf jvsr hagb
uvz, Vs Zbeqrpnv or bs gur frrq bs gur Wrjf, orsber jubz gubh unfg
ortha gb snyy, gubh funyg abg cerinvy ntnvafg uvz, ohg funyg fheryl
snyy orsber uvz.

6:14 Naq juvyr gurl jrer lrg gnyxvat jvgu uvz, pnzr gur xvat'f
punzoreynvaf, naq unfgrq gb oevat Unzna hagb gur onadhrg gung Rfgure
unq cercnerq.

7:1 Fb gur xvat naq Unzna pnzr gb onadhrg jvgu Rfgure gur dhrra.

7:2 Naq gur xvat fnvq ntnva hagb Rfgure ba gur frpbaq qnl ng gur
onadhrg bs jvar, Jung vf gul crgvgvba, dhrra Rfgure? naq vg funyy or
tenagrq gurr: naq jung vf gul erdhrfg? naq vg funyy or cresbezrq, rira
gb gur unys bs gur xvatqbz.

7:3 Gura Rfgure gur dhrra nafjrerq naq fnvq, Vs V unir sbhaq snibhe va
gul fvtug, B xvat, naq vs vg cyrnfr gur xvat, yrg zl yvsr or tvira zr
ng zl crgvgvba, naq zl crbcyr ng zl erdhrfg: 7:4 Sbe jr ner fbyq, V
naq zl crbcyr, gb or qrfgeblrq, gb or fynva, naq gb crevfu. Ohg vs jr
unq orra fbyq sbe obaqzra naq obaqjbzra, V unq uryq zl gbathr,
nygubhtu gur rarzl pbhyq abg pbhagreinvy gur xvat'f qnzntr.

7:5 Gura gur xvat Nunfhrehf nafjrerq naq fnvq hagb Rfgure gur dhrra,
Jub vf ur, naq jurer vf ur, gung qhefg cerfhzr va uvf urneg gb qb fb?
7:6 Naq Rfgure fnvq, Gur nqirefnel naq rarzl vf guvf jvpxrq Unzna.
Gura Unzna jnf nsenvq orsber gur xvat naq gur dhrra.

7:7 Naq gur xvat nevfvat sebz gur onadhrg bs jvar va uvf jengu jrag
vagb gur cnynpr tneqra: naq Unzna fgbbq hc gb znxr erdhrfg sbe uvf
yvsr gb Rfgure gur dhrra; sbe ur fnj gung gurer jnf rivy qrgrezvarq
ntnvafg uvz ol gur xvat.

7:8 Gura gur xvat erghearq bhg bs gur cnynpr tneqra vagb gur cynpr bs
gur onadhrg bs jvar; naq Unzna jnf snyyra hcba gur orq jurerba Rfgure
jnf. Gura fnvq gur xvat, Jvyy ur sbepr gur dhrra nyfb orsber zr va gur
ubhfr? Nf gur jbeq jrag bhg bs xvat'f zbhgu, gurl pbirerq Unzna'f
snpr.

7:9 Naq Uneobanu, bar bs gur punzoreynvaf, fnvq orsber gur xvat,
Orubyq nyfb, gur tnyybjf svsgl phovgf uvtu, juvpu Unzna unq znqr sbe
Zbeqrpnv, jub fcbxra tbbq sbe gur xvat, fgnaqrgu va gur ubhfr bs
Unzna. Gura gur xvat fnvq, Unat uvz gurerba.

7:10 Fb gurl unatrq Unzna ba gur tnyybjf gung ur unq cercnerq sbe
Zbeqrpnv. Gura jnf gur xvat'f jengu cnpvsvrq.

8:1 Ba gung qnl qvq gur xvat Nunfhrehf tvir gur ubhfr bs Unzna gur
Wrjf' rarzl hagb Rfgure gur dhrra. Naq Zbeqrpnv pnzr orsber gur xvat;
sbe Rfgure unq gbyq jung ur jnf hagb ure.

8:2 Naq gur xvat gbbx bss uvf evat, juvpu ur unq gnxra sebz Unzna, naq
tnir vg hagb Zbeqrpnv. Naq Rfgure frg Zbeqrpnv bire gur ubhfr bs
Unzna.

8:3 Naq Rfgure fcnxr lrg ntnva orsber gur xvat, naq sryy qbja ng uvf
srrg, naq orfbhtug uvz jvgu grnef gb chg njnl gur zvfpuvrs bs Unzna
gur Ntntvgr, naq uvf qrivpr gung ur unq qrivfrq ntnvafg gur Wrjf.

8:4 Gura gur xvat uryq bhg gur tbyqra fprcger gbjneq Rfgure. Fb Rfgure
nebfr, naq fgbbq orsber gur xvat, 8:5 Naq fnvq, Vs vg cyrnfr gur xvat,
naq vs V unir snibhe va uvf fvtug, naq gur guvat frrz evtug orsber gur
xvat, naq V or cyrnfvat va uvf rlrf, yrg vg or jevggra gb erirefr gur
yrggref qrivfrq ol Unzna gur fba bs Unzzrqngun gur Ntntvgr, juvpu ur
jebgr gb qrfgebl gur Wrjf juvpu ner va nyy gur xvat'f cebivaprf: 8:6
Sbe ubj pna V raqher gb frr gur rivy gung funyy pbzr hagb zl crbcyr?
be ubj pna V raqher gb frr gur qrfgehpgvba bs zl xvaqerq?  8:7 Gura
gur xvat Nunfhrehf fnvq hagb Rfgure gur dhrra naq gb Zbeqrpnv gur Wrj,
Orubyq, V unir tvira Rfgure gur ubhfr bs Unzna, naq uvz gurl unir
unatrq hcba gur tnyybjf, orpnhfr ur ynvq uvf unaq hcba gur Wrjf.

8:8 Jevgr lr nyfb sbe gur Wrjf, nf vg yvxrgu lbh, va gur xvat'f anzr,
naq frny vg jvgu gur xvat'f evat: sbe gur jevgvat juvpu vf jevggra va
gur xvat'f anzr, naq frnyrq jvgu gur xvat'f evat, znl ab zna erirefr.

8:9 Gura jrer gur xvat'f fpevorf pnyyrq ng gung gvzr va gur guveq
zbagu, gung vf, gur zbagu Fvina, ba gur guerr naq gjragvrgu qnl
gurerbs; naq vg jnf jevggra nppbeqvat gb nyy gung Zbeqrpnv pbzznaqrq
hagb gur Wrjf, naq gb gur yvrhgranagf, naq gur qrchgvrf naq ehyref bs
gur cebivaprf juvpu ner sebz Vaqvn hagb Rguvbcvn, na uhaqerq gjragl
naq frira cebivaprf, hagb rirel cebivapr nppbeqvat gb gur jevgvat
gurerbs, naq hagb rirel crbcyr nsgre gurve ynathntr, naq gb gur Wrjf
nppbeqvat gb gurve jevgvat, naq nppbeqvat gb gurve ynathntr.

8:10 Naq ur jebgr va gur xvat Nunfhrehf' anzr, naq frnyrq vg jvgu gur
xvat'f evat, naq frag yrggref ol cbfgf ba ubefronpx, naq evqref ba
zhyrf, pnzryf, naq lbhat qebzrqnevrf: 8:11 Jurerva gur xvat tenagrq
gur Wrjf juvpu jrer va rirel pvgl gb tngure gurzfryirf gbtrgure, naq
gb fgnaq sbe gurve yvsr, gb qrfgebl, gb fynl naq gb pnhfr gb crevfu,
nyy gur cbjre bs gur crbcyr naq cebivapr gung jbhyq nffnhyg gurz, obgu
yvggyr barf naq jbzra, naq gb gnxr gur fcbvy bs gurz sbe n cerl, 8:12
Hcba bar qnl va nyy gur cebivaprf bs xvat Nunfhrehf, anzryl, hcba gur
guvegrragu qnl bs gur gjrysgu zbagu, juvpu vf gur zbagu Nqne.

8:13 Gur pbcl bs gur jevgvat sbe n pbzznaqzrag gb or tvira va rirel
cebivapr jnf choyvfurq hagb nyy crbcyr, naq gung gur Wrjf fubhyq or
ernql ntnvafg gung qnl gb niratr gurzfryirf ba gurve rarzvrf.

8:14 Fb gur cbfgf gung ebqr hcba zhyrf naq pnzryf jrag bhg, orvat
unfgrarq naq cerffrq ba ol gur xvat'f pbzznaqzrag. Naq gur qrperr jnf
tvira ng Fuhfuna gur cnynpr.

8:15 Naq Zbeqrpnv jrag bhg sebz gur cerfrapr bs gur xvat va eblny
nccnery bs oyhr naq juvgr, naq jvgu n terng pebja bs tbyq, naq jvgu n
tnezrag bs svar yvara naq checyr: naq gur pvgl bs Fuhfuna erwbvprq naq
jnf tynq.

8:16 Gur Wrjf unq yvtug, naq tynqarff, naq wbl, naq ubabhe.

8:17 Naq va rirel cebivapr, naq va rirel pvgl, juvgurefbrire gur
xvat'f pbzznaqzrag naq uvf qrperr pnzr, gur Wrjf unq wbl naq tynqarff,
n srnfg naq n tbbq qnl. Naq znal bs gur crbcyr bs gur ynaq orpnzr
Wrjf; sbe gur srne bs gur Wrjf sryy hcba gurz.

9:1 Abj va gur gjrysgu zbagu, gung vf, gur zbagu Nqne, ba gur
guvegrragu qnl bs gur fnzr, jura gur xvat'f pbzznaqzrag naq uvf qrperr
qerj arne gb or chg va rkrphgvba, va gur qnl gung gur rarzvrf bs gur
Wrjf ubcrq gb unir cbjre bire gurz, (gubhtu vg jnf ghearq gb gur
pbagenel, gung gur Wrjf unq ehyr bire gurz gung ungrq gurz;) 9:2 Gur
Wrjf tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure va gurve pvgvrf guebhtubhg nyy gur
cebivaprf bs gur xvat Nunfhrehf, gb ynl unaq ba fhpu nf fbhtug gurve
uheg: naq ab zna pbhyq jvgufgnaq gurz; sbe gur srne bs gurz sryy hcba
nyy crbcyr.

9:3 Naq nyy gur ehyref bs gur cebivaprf, naq gur yvrhgranagf, naq gur
qrchgvrf, naq bssvpref bs gur xvat, urycrq gur Wrjf; orpnhfr gur srne
bs Zbeqrpnv sryy hcba gurz.

9:4 Sbe Zbeqrpnv jnf terng va gur xvat'f ubhfr, naq uvf snzr jrag bhg
guebhtubhg nyy gur cebivaprf: sbe guvf zna Zbeqrpnv jnkrq terngre naq
terngre.

9:5 Guhf gur Wrjf fzbgr nyy gurve rarzvrf jvgu gur fgebxr bs gur
fjbeq, naq fynhtugre, naq qrfgehpgvba, naq qvq jung gurl jbhyq hagb
gubfr gung ungrq gurz.

9:6 Naq va Fuhfuna gur cnynpr gur Wrjf fyrj naq qrfgeblrq svir uhaqerq
zra.

9:7 Naq Cnefunaqngun, naq Qnycuba, naq Nfcngun, 9:8 Naq Cbengun, naq
Nqnyvn, naq Nevqngun, 9:9 Naq Cneznfugn, naq Nevfnv, naq Nevqnv, naq
Inwrmngun, 9:10 Gur gra fbaf bs Unzna gur fba bs Unzzrqngun, gur rarzl
bs gur Wrjf, fyrj gurl; ohg ba gur fcbvy ynvq gurl abg gurve unaq.

9:11 Ba gung qnl gur ahzore bs gubfr gung jrer fynva va Fuhfuna gur
cnynpr jnf oebhtug orsber gur xvat.

9:12 Naq gur xvat fnvq hagb Rfgure gur dhrra, Gur Wrjf unir fynva naq
qrfgeblrq svir uhaqerq zra va Fuhfuna gur cnynpr, naq gur gra fbaf bs
Unzna; jung unir gurl qbar va gur erfg bs gur xvat'f cebivaprf? abj
jung vf gul crgvgvba? naq vg funyy or tenagrq gurr: be jung vf gul
erdhrfg shegure? naq vg funyy or qbar.

9:13 Gura fnvq Rfgure, Vs vg cyrnfr gur xvat, yrg vg or tenagrq gb gur
Wrjf juvpu ner va Fuhfuna gb qb gb zbeebj nyfb nppbeqvat hagb guvf
qnl'f qrperr, naq yrg Unzna'f gra fbaf or unatrq hcba gur tnyybjf.

9:14 Naq gur xvat pbzznaqrq vg fb gb or qbar: naq gur qrperr jnf tvira
ng Fuhfuna; naq gurl unatrq Unzna'f gra fbaf.

9:15 Sbe gur Wrjf gung jrer va Fuhfuna tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure ba
gur sbhegrragu qnl nyfb bs gur zbagu Nqne, naq fyrj guerr uhaqerq zra
ng Fuhfuna; ohg ba gur cerl gurl ynvq abg gurve unaq.

9:16 Ohg gur bgure Wrjf gung jrer va gur xvat'f cebivaprf tngurerq
gurzfryirf gbtrgure, naq fgbbq sbe gurve yvirf, naq unq erfg sebz
gurve rarzvrf, naq fyrj bs gurve sbrf friragl naq svir gubhfnaq, ohg
gurl ynvq abg gurve unaqf ba gur cerl, 9:17 Ba gur guvegrragu qnl bs
gur zbagu Nqne; naq ba gur sbhegrragu qnl bs gur fnzr erfgrq gurl, naq
znqr vg n qnl bs srnfgvat naq tynqarff.

9:18 Ohg gur Wrjf gung jrer ng Fuhfuna nffrzoyrq gbtrgure ba gur
guvegrragu qnl gurerbs, naq ba gur sbhegrragu gurerbs; naq ba gur
svsgrragu qnl bs gur fnzr gurl erfgrq, naq znqr vg n qnl bs srnfgvat
naq tynqarff.

9:19 Gurersber gur Wrjf bs gur ivyyntrf, gung qjryg va gur hajnyyrq
gbjaf, znqr gur sbhegrragu qnl bs gur zbagu Nqne n qnl bs tynqarff naq
srnfgvat, naq n tbbq qnl, naq bs fraqvat cbegvbaf bar gb nabgure.

9:20 Naq Zbeqrpnv jebgr gurfr guvatf, naq frag yrggref hagb nyy gur
Wrjf gung jrer va nyy gur cebivaprf bs gur xvat Nunfhrehf, obgu avtu
naq sne, 9:21 Gb fgnoyvfu guvf nzbat gurz, gung gurl fubhyq xrrc gur
sbhegrragu qnl bs gur zbagu Nqne, naq gur svsgrragu qnl bs gur fnzr,
lrneyl, 9:22 Nf gur qnlf jurerva gur Wrjf erfgrq sebz gurve rarzvrf,
naq gur zbagu juvpu jnf ghearq hagb gurz sebz fbeebj gb wbl, naq sebz
zbheavat vagb n tbbq qnl: gung gurl fubhyq znxr gurz qnlf bs srnfgvat
naq wbl, naq bs fraqvat cbegvbaf bar gb nabgure, naq tvsgf gb gur
cbbe.

9:23 Naq gur Wrjf haqregbbx gb qb nf gurl unq ortha, naq nf Zbeqrpnv
unq jevggra hagb gurz; 9:24 Orpnhfr Unzna gur fba bs Unzzrqngun, gur
Ntntvgr, gur rarzl bs nyy gur Wrjf, unq qrivfrq ntnvafg gur Wrjf gb
qrfgebl gurz, naq unq pnfg Che, gung vf, gur ybg, gb pbafhzr gurz, naq
gb qrfgebl gurz; 9:25 Ohg jura Rfgure pnzr orsber gur xvat, ur
pbzznaqrq ol yrggref gung uvf jvpxrq qrivpr, juvpu ur qrivfrq ntnvafg
gur Wrjf, fubhyq erghea hcba uvf bja urnq, naq gung ur naq uvf fbaf
fubhyq or unatrq ba gur tnyybjf.

9:26 Jurersber gurl pnyyrq gurfr qnlf Chevz nsgre gur anzr bs Che.

Gurersber sbe nyy gur jbeqf bs guvf yrggre, naq bs gung juvpu gurl unq
frra pbapreavat guvf znggre, naq juvpu unq pbzr hagb gurz, 9:27 Gur
Wrjf beqnvarq, naq gbbx hcba gurz, naq hcba gurve frrq, naq hcba nyy
fhpu nf wbvarq gurzfryirf hagb gurz, fb nf vg fubhyq abg snvy, gung
gurl jbhyq xrrc gurfr gjb qnlf nppbeqvat gb gurve jevgvat, naq
nppbeqvat gb gurve nccbvagrq gvzr rirel lrne; 9:28 Naq gung gurfr qnlf
fubhyq or erzrzorerq naq xrcg guebhtubhg rirel trarengvba, rirel
snzvyl, rirel cebivapr, naq rirel pvgl; naq gung gurfr qnlf bs Chevz
fubhyq abg snvy sebz nzbat gur Wrjf, abe gur zrzbevny bs gurz crevfu
sebz gurve frrq.

9:29 Gura Rfgure gur dhrra, gur qnhtugre bs Novunvy, naq Zbeqrpnv gur
Wrj, jebgr jvgu nyy nhgubevgl, gb pbasvez guvf frpbaq yrggre bs Chevz.

9:30 Naq ur frag gur yrggref hagb nyy gur Wrjf, gb gur uhaqerq gjragl
naq frira cebivaprf bs gur xvatqbz bs Nunfhrehf, jvgu jbeqf bs crnpr
naq gehgu, 9:31 Gb pbasvez gurfr qnlf bs Chevz va gurve gvzrf
nccbvagrq, nppbeqvat nf Zbeqrpnv gur Wrj naq Rfgure gur dhrra unq
rawbvarq gurz, naq nf gurl unq qrperrq sbe gurzfryirf naq sbe gurve
frrq, gur znggref bs gur snfgvatf naq gurve pel.

9:32 Naq gur qrperr bs Rfgure pbasvezrq gurfr znggref bs Chevz; naq vg
jnf jevggra va gur obbx.

10:1 Naq gur xvat Nunfhrehf ynvq n gevohgr hcba gur ynaq, naq hcba gur
vfyrf bs gur frn.

10:2 Naq nyy gur npgf bs uvf cbjre naq bs uvf zvtug, naq gur
qrpynengvba bs gur terngarff bs Zbeqrpnv, jurerhagb gur xvat nqinaprq
uvz, ner gurl abg jevggra va gur obbx bs gur puebavpyrf bs gur xvatf
bs Zrqvn naq Crefvn?  10:3 Sbe Zbeqrpnv gur Wrj jnf arkg hagb xvat
Nunfhrehf, naq terng nzbat gur Wrjf, naq npprcgrq bs gur zhygvghqr bs
uvf oerguera, frrxvat gur jrnygu bs uvf crbcyr, naq fcrnxvat crnpr gb
nyy uvf frrq.




Gur Obbx bs Wbo


1:1 Gurer jnf n zna va gur ynaq bs Hm, jubfr anzr jnf Wbo; naq gung
zna jnf cresrpg naq hcevtug, naq bar gung srnerq Tbq, naq rfpurjrq rivy.

1:2 Naq gurer jrer obea hagb uvz frira fbaf naq guerr qnhtugref.

1:3 Uvf fhofgnapr nyfb jnf frira gubhfnaq furrc, naq guerr gubhfnaq
pnzryf, naq svir uhaqerq lbxr bs bkra, naq svir uhaqerq fur nffrf, naq
n irel terng ubhfrubyq; fb gung guvf zna jnf gur terngrfg bs nyy gur
zra bs gur rnfg.

1:4 Naq uvf fbaf jrag naq srnfgrq va gurve ubhfrf, rirel bar uvf qnl;
naq frag naq pnyyrq sbe gurve guerr fvfgref gb rng naq gb qevax jvgu
gurz.

1:5 Naq vg jnf fb, jura gur qnlf bs gurve srnfgvat jrer tbar nobhg,
gung Wbo frag naq fnapgvsvrq gurz, naq ebfr hc rneyl va gur zbeavat,
naq bssrerq oheag bssrevatf nppbeqvat gb gur ahzore bs gurz nyy: sbe
Wbo fnvq, Vg znl or gung zl fbaf unir fvaarq, naq phefrq Tbq va gurve
urnegf. Guhf qvq Wbo pbagvahnyyl.

1:6 Abj gurer jnf n qnl jura gur fbaf bs Tbq pnzr gb cerfrag
gurzfryirf orsber gur YBEQ, naq Fngna pnzr nyfb nzbat gurz.

1:7 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Fngna, Jurapr pbzrfg gubh? Gura Fngna
nafjrerq gur YBEQ, naq fnvq, Sebz tbvat gb naq seb va gur rnegu, naq
sebz jnyxvat hc naq qbja va vg.

1:8 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Fngna, Unfg gubh pbafvqrerq zl freinag Wbo,
gung gurer vf abar yvxr uvz va gur rnegu, n cresrpg naq na hcevtug
zna, bar gung srnergu Tbq, naq rfpurjrgu rivy?  1:9 Gura Fngna
nafjrerq gur YBEQ, naq fnvq, Qbgu Wbo srne Tbq sbe abhtug?  1:10 Unfg
abg gubh znqr na urqtr nobhg uvz, naq nobhg uvf ubhfr, naq nobhg nyy
gung ur ungu ba rirel fvqr? gubh unfg oyrffrq gur jbex bs uvf unaqf,
naq uvf fhofgnapr vf vapernfrq va gur ynaq.

1:11 Ohg chg sbegu guvar unaq abj, naq gbhpu nyy gung ur ungu, naq ur
jvyy phefr gurr gb gul snpr.

1:12 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Fngna, Orubyq, nyy gung ur ungu vf va gul
cbjre; bayl hcba uvzfrys chg abg sbegu guvar unaq. Fb Fngna jrag sbegu
sebz gur cerfrapr bs gur YBEQ.

1:13 Naq gurer jnf n qnl jura uvf fbaf naq uvf qnhtugref jrer rngvat
naq qevaxvat jvar va gurve ryqrfg oebgure'f ubhfr: 1:14 Naq gurer pnzr
n zrffratre hagb Wbo, naq fnvq, Gur bkra jrer cybjvat, naq gur nffrf
srrqvat orfvqr gurz: 1:15 Naq gur Fnornaf sryy hcba gurz, naq gbbx
gurz njnl; lrn, gurl unir fynva gur freinagf jvgu gur rqtr bs gur
fjbeq; naq V bayl nz rfpncrq nybar gb gryy gurr.

1:16 Juvyr ur jnf lrg fcrnxvat, gurer pnzr nyfb nabgure, naq fnvq, Gur
sver bs Tbq vf snyyra sebz urnira, naq ungu ohearq hc gur furrc, naq
gur freinagf, naq pbafhzrq gurz; naq V bayl nz rfpncrq nybar gb gryy
gurr.

1:17 Juvyr ur jnf lrg fcrnxvat, gurer pnzr nyfb nabgure, naq fnvq, Gur
Punyqrnaf znqr bhg guerr onaqf, naq sryy hcba gur pnzryf, naq unir
pneevrq gurz njnl, lrn, naq fynva gur freinagf jvgu gur rqtr bs gur
fjbeq; naq V bayl nz rfpncrq nybar gb gryy gurr.

1:18 Juvyr ur jnf lrg fcrnxvat, gurer pnzr nyfb nabgure, naq fnvq, Gul
fbaf naq gul qnhtugref jrer rngvat naq qevaxvat jvar va gurve ryqrfg
oebgure'f ubhfr: 1:19 Naq, orubyq, gurer pnzr n terng jvaq sebz gur
jvyqrearff, naq fzbgr gur sbhe pbearef bs gur ubhfr, naq vg sryy hcba
gur lbhat zra, naq gurl ner qrnq; naq V bayl nz rfpncrq nybar gb gryy
gurr.

1:20 Gura Wbo nebfr, naq erag uvf znagyr, naq funirq uvf urnq, naq
sryy qbja hcba gur tebhaq, naq jbefuvccrq, 1:21 Naq fnvq, Anxrq pnzr V
bhg bs zl zbgure'f jbzo, naq anxrq funyy V erghea guvgure: gur YBEQ
tnir, naq gur YBEQ ungu gnxra njnl; oyrffrq or gur anzr bs gur YBEQ.

1:22 Va nyy guvf Wbo fvaarq abg, abe punetrq Tbq sbbyvfuyl.

2:1 Ntnva gurer jnf n qnl jura gur fbaf bs Tbq pnzr gb cerfrag
gurzfryirf orsber gur YBEQ, naq Fngna pnzr nyfb nzbat gurz gb cerfrag
uvzfrys orsber gur YBEQ.

2:2 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Fngna, Sebz jurapr pbzrfg gubh? Naq Fngna
nafjrerq gur YBEQ, naq fnvq, Sebz tbvat gb naq seb va gur rnegu, naq
sebz jnyxvat hc naq qbja va vg.

2:3 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Fngna, Unfg gubh pbafvqrerq zl freinag Wbo,
gung gurer vf abar yvxr uvz va gur rnegu, n cresrpg naq na hcevtug
zna, bar gung srnergu Tbq, naq rfpurjrgu rivy? naq fgvyy ur ubyqrgu
snfg uvf vagrtevgl, nygubhtu gubh zbirqfg zr ntnvafg uvz, gb qrfgebl
uvz jvgubhg pnhfr.

2:4 Naq Fngna nafjrerq gur YBEQ, naq fnvq, Fxva sbe fxva, lrn, nyy
gung n zna ungu jvyy ur tvir sbe uvf yvsr.

2:5 Ohg chg sbegu guvar unaq abj, naq gbhpu uvf obar naq uvf syrfu,
naq ur jvyy phefr gurr gb gul snpr.

2:6 Naq gur YBEQ fnvq hagb Fngna, Orubyq, ur vf va guvar unaq; ohg
fnir uvf yvsr.

2:7 Fb jrag Fngna sbegu sebz gur cerfrapr bs gur YBEQ, naq fzbgr Wbo
jvgu fber obvyf sebz gur fbyr bs uvf sbbg hagb uvf pebja.

2:8 Naq ur gbbx uvz n cbgfureq gb fpencr uvzfrys jvguny; naq ur fng
qbja nzbat gur nfurf.

2:9 Gura fnvq uvf jvsr hagb uvz, Qbfg gubh fgvyy ergnva guvar
vagrtevgl?  phefr Tbq, naq qvr.

2:10 Ohg ur fnvq hagb ure, Gubh fcrnxrfg nf bar bs gur sbbyvfu jbzra
fcrnxrgu. Jung? funyy jr erprvir tbbq ng gur unaq bs Tbq, naq funyy jr
abg erprvir rivy? Va nyy guvf qvq abg Wbo fva jvgu uvf yvcf.

2:11 Abj jura Wbo'f guerr sevraqf urneq bs nyy guvf rivy gung jnf pbzr
hcba uvz, gurl pnzr rirel bar sebz uvf bja cynpr; Ryvcunm gur
Grznavgr, naq Ovyqnq gur Fuhuvgr, naq Mbcune gur Annznguvgr: sbe gurl
unq znqr na nccbvagzrag gbtrgure gb pbzr gb zbhea jvgu uvz naq gb
pbzsbeg uvz.

2:12 Naq jura gurl yvsgrq hc gurve rlrf nsne bss, naq xarj uvz abg,
gurl yvsgrq hc gurve ibvpr, naq jrcg; naq gurl erag rirel bar uvf
znagyr, naq fcevaxyrq qhfg hcba gurve urnqf gbjneq urnira.

2:13 Fb gurl fng qbja jvgu uvz hcba gur tebhaq frira qnlf naq frira
avtugf, naq abar fcnxr n jbeq hagb uvz: sbe gurl fnj gung uvf tevrs
jnf irel terng.

3:1 Nsgre guvf bcrarq Wbo uvf zbhgu, naq phefrq uvf qnl.

3:2 Naq Wbo fcnxr, naq fnvq, 3:3 Yrg gur qnl crevfu jurerva V jnf
obea, naq gur avtug va juvpu vg jnf fnvq, Gurer vf n zna puvyq
pbaprvirq.

3:4 Yrg gung qnl or qnexarff; yrg abg Tbq ertneq vg sebz nobir,
arvgure yrg gur yvtug fuvar hcba vg.

3:5 Yrg qnexarff naq gur funqbj bs qrngu fgnva vg; yrg n pybhq qjryy
hcba vg; yrg gur oynpxarff bs gur qnl greevsl vg.

3:6 Nf sbe gung avtug, yrg qnexarff frvmr hcba vg; yrg vg abg or
wbvarq hagb gur qnlf bs gur lrne, yrg vg abg pbzr vagb gur ahzore bs
gur zbaguf.

3:7 Yb, yrg gung avtug or fbyvgnel, yrg ab wblshy ibvpr pbzr gurerva.

3:8 Yrg gurz phefr vg gung phefr gur qnl, jub ner ernql gb envfr hc
gurve zbheavat.

3:9 Yrg gur fgnef bs gur gjvyvtug gurerbs or qnex; yrg vg ybbx sbe
yvtug, ohg unir abar; arvgure yrg vg frr gur qnjavat bs gur qnl: 3:10
Orpnhfr vg fuhg abg hc gur qbbef bs zl zbgure'f jbzo, abe uvq fbeebj
sebz zvar rlrf.

3:11 Jul qvrq V abg sebz gur jbzo? jul qvq V abg tvir hc gur tubfg
jura V pnzr bhg bs gur oryyl?  3:12 Jul qvq gur xarrf cerirag zr? be
jul gur oernfgf gung V fubhyq fhpx?  3:13 Sbe abj fubhyq V unir ynva
fgvyy naq orra dhvrg, V fubhyq unir fyrcg: gura unq V orra ng erfg,
3:14 Jvgu xvatf naq pbhafryybef bs gur rnegu, juvpu ohvyq qrfbyngr
cynprf sbe gurzfryirf; 3:15 Be jvgu cevaprf gung unq tbyq, jub svyyrq
gurve ubhfrf jvgu fvyire: 3:16 Be nf na uvqqra hagvzryl ovegu V unq
abg orra; nf vasnagf juvpu arire fnj yvtug.

3:17 Gurer gur jvpxrq prnfr sebz gebhoyvat; naq gurer gur jrnel or ng
erfg.

3:18 Gurer gur cevfbaref erfg gbtrgure; gurl urne abg gur ibvpr bs gur
bccerffbe.

3:19 Gur fznyy naq terng ner gurer; naq gur freinag vf serr sebz uvf
znfgre.

3:20 Jurersber vf yvtug tvira gb uvz gung vf va zvfrel, naq yvsr hagb
gur ovggre va fbhy; 3:21 Juvpu ybat sbe qrngu, ohg vg pbzrgu abg; naq
qvt sbe vg zber guna sbe uvq gernfherf; 3:22 Juvpu erwbvpr
rkprrqvatyl, naq ner tynq, jura gurl pna svaq gur tenir?  3:23 Jul vf
yvtug tvira gb n zna jubfr jnl vf uvq, naq jubz Tbq ungu urqtrq va?
3:24 Sbe zl fvtuvat pbzrgu orsber V rng, naq zl ebnevatf ner cbherq
bhg yvxr gur jngref.

3:25 Sbe gur guvat juvpu V terngyl srnerq vf pbzr hcba zr, naq gung
juvpu V jnf nsenvq bs vf pbzr hagb zr.

3:26 V jnf abg va fnsrgl, arvgure unq V erfg, arvgure jnf V dhvrg; lrg
gebhoyr pnzr.

4:1 Gura Ryvcunm gur Grznavgr nafjrerq naq fnvq, 4:2 Vs jr nffnl gb
pbzzhar jvgu gurr, jvyg gubh or tevrirq? ohg jub pna jvguubyq uvzfrys
sebz fcrnxvat?  4:3 Orubyq, gubh unfg vafgehpgrq znal, naq gubh unfg
fgeratgurarq gur jrnx unaqf.

4:4 Gul jbeqf unir hcubyqra uvz gung jnf snyyvat, naq gubh unfg
fgeratgurarq gur srroyr xarrf.

4:5 Ohg abj vg vf pbzr hcba gurr, naq gubh snvagrfg; vg gbhpurgu gurr,
naq gubh neg gebhoyrq.

4:6 Vf abg guvf gul srne, gul pbasvqrapr, gul ubcr, naq gur
hcevtugarff bs gul jnlf?  4:7 Erzrzore, V cenl gurr, jub rire
crevfurq, orvat vaabprag? be jurer jrer gur evtugrbhf phg bss?  4:8
Rira nf V unir frra, gurl gung cybj vavdhvgl, naq fbj jvpxrqarff, ernc
gur fnzr.

4:9 Ol gur oynfg bs Tbq gurl crevfu, naq ol gur oerngu bs uvf abfgevyf
ner gurl pbafhzrq.

4:10 Gur ebnevat bs gur yvba, naq gur ibvpr bs gur svrepr yvba, naq
gur grrgu bs gur lbhat yvbaf, ner oebxra.

4:11 Gur byq yvba crevfurgu sbe ynpx bs cerl, naq gur fgbhg yvba'f
jurycf ner fpnggrerq noebnq.

4:12 Abj n guvat jnf frpergyl oebhtug gb zr, naq zvar rne erprvirq n
yvggyr gurerbs.

4:13 Va gubhtugf sebz gur ivfvbaf bs gur avtug, jura qrrc fyrrc
snyyrgu ba zra, 4:14 Srne pnzr hcba zr, naq gerzoyvat, juvpu znqr nyy
zl obarf gb funxr.

4:15 Gura n fcvevg cnffrq orsber zl snpr; gur unve bs zl syrfu fgbbq
hc: 4:16 Vg fgbbq fgvyy, ohg V pbhyq abg qvfprea gur sbez gurerbs: na
vzntr jnf orsber zvar rlrf, gurer jnf fvyrapr, naq V urneq n ibvpr,
fnlvat, 4:17 Funyy zbegny zna or zber whfg guna Tbq? funyy n zna or
zber cher guna uvf znxre?  4:18 Orubyq, ur chg ab gehfg va uvf
freinagf; naq uvf natryf ur punetrq jvgu sbyyl: 4:19 Ubj zhpu yrff va
gurz gung qjryy va ubhfrf bs pynl, jubfr sbhaqngvba vf va gur qhfg,
juvpu ner pehfurq orsber gur zbgu?  4:20 Gurl ner qrfgeblrq sebz
zbeavat gb riravat: gurl crevfu sbe rire jvgubhg nal ertneqvat vg.

4:21 Qbgu abg gurve rkpryyrapl juvpu vf va gurz tb njnl? gurl qvr,
rira jvgubhg jvfqbz.

5:1 Pnyy abj, vs gurer or nal gung jvyy nafjre gurr; naq gb juvpu bs
gur fnvagf jvyg gubh ghea?  5:2 Sbe jengu xvyyrgu gur sbbyvfu zna, naq
rail fynlrgu gur fvyyl bar.

5:3 V unir frra gur sbbyvfu gnxvat ebbg: ohg fhqqrayl V phefrq uvf
unovgngvba.

5:4 Uvf puvyqera ner sne sebz fnsrgl, naq gurl ner pehfurq va gur
tngr, arvgure vf gurer nal gb qryvire gurz.

5:5 Jubfr uneirfg gur uhatel rngrgu hc, naq gnxrgu vg rira bhg bs gur
gubeaf, naq gur eboore fjnyybjrgu hc gurve fhofgnapr.

5:6 Nygubhtu nssyvpgvba pbzrgu abg sbegu bs gur qhfg, arvgure qbgu
gebhoyr fcevat bhg bs gur tebhaq; 5:7 Lrg zna vf obea hagb gebhoyr, nf
gur fcnexf syl hcjneq.

5:8 V jbhyq frrx hagb Tbq, naq hagb Tbq jbhyq V pbzzvg zl pnhfr: 5:9
Juvpu qbrgu terng guvatf naq hafrnepunoyr; zneiryybhf guvatf jvgubhg
ahzore: 5:10 Jub tvirgu enva hcba gur rnegu, naq fraqrgu jngref hcba
gur svryqf: 5:11 Gb frg hc ba uvtu gubfr gung or ybj; gung gubfr juvpu
zbhea znl or rknygrq gb fnsrgl.

5:12 Ur qvfnccbvagrgu gur qrivprf bs gur pensgl, fb gung gurve unaqf
pnaabg cresbez gurve ragrecevfr.

5:13 Ur gnxrgu gur jvfr va gurve bja pensgvarff: naq gur pbhafry bs
gur sebjneq vf pneevrq urnqybat.

5:14 Gurl zrrg jvgu qnexarff va gur qnl gvzr, naq tebcr va gur abbaqnl
nf va gur avtug.

5:15 Ohg ur fnirgu gur cbbe sebz gur fjbeq, sebz gurve zbhgu, naq sebz
gur unaq bs gur zvtugl.

5:16 Fb gur cbbe ungu ubcr, naq vavdhvgl fgbccrgu ure zbhgu.

5:17 Orubyq, unccl vf gur zna jubz Tbq pbeerpgrgu: gurersber qrfcvfr
abg gubh gur punfgravat bs gur Nyzvtugl: 5:18 Sbe ur znxrgu fber, naq
ovaqrgu hc: ur jbhaqrgu, naq uvf unaqf znxr jubyr.

5:19 Ur funyy qryvire gurr va fvk gebhoyrf: lrn, va frira gurer funyy
ab rivy gbhpu gurr.

5:20 Va snzvar ur funyy erqrrz gurr sebz qrngu: naq va jne sebz gur
cbjre bs gur fjbeq.

5:21 Gubh funyg or uvq sebz gur fpbhetr bs gur gbathr: arvgure funyg
gubh or nsenvq bs qrfgehpgvba jura vg pbzrgu.

5:22 Ng qrfgehpgvba naq snzvar gubh funyg ynhtu: arvgure funyg gubh or
nsenvq bs gur ornfgf bs gur rnegu.

5:23 Sbe gubh funyg or va yrnthr jvgu gur fgbarf bs gur svryq: naq gur
ornfgf bs gur svryq funyy or ng crnpr jvgu gurr.

5:24 Naq gubh funyg xabj gung gul gnoreanpyr funyy or va crnpr; naq
gubh funyg ivfvg gul unovgngvba, naq funyg abg fva.

5:25 Gubh funyg xabj nyfb gung gul frrq funyy or terng, naq guvar
bssfcevat nf gur tenff bs gur rnegu.

5:26 Gubh funyg pbzr gb gul tenir va n shyy ntr, yvxr nf n fubpx bs
pbea pbzrgu va va uvf frnfba.

5:27 Yb guvf, jr unir frnepurq vg, fb vg vf; urne vg, naq xabj gubh vg
sbe gul tbbq.

6:1 Ohg Wbo nafjrerq naq fnvq, 6:2 Bu gung zl tevrs jrer guebhtuyl
jrvturq, naq zl pnynzvgl ynvq va gur onynaprf gbtrgure!  6:3 Sbe abj
vg jbhyq or urnivre guna gur fnaq bs gur frn: gurersber zl jbeqf ner
fjnyybjrq hc.

6:4 Sbe gur neebjf bs gur Nyzvtugl ner jvguva zr, gur cbvfba jurerbs
qevaxrgu hc zl fcvevg: gur greebef bs Tbq qb frg gurzfryirf va neenl
ntnvafg zr.

6:5 Qbgu gur jvyq nff oenl jura ur ungu tenff? be ybjrgu gur bk bire
uvf sbqqre?  6:6 Pna gung juvpu vf hafnibhel or rngra jvgubhg fnyg? be
vf gurer nal gnfgr va gur juvgr bs na rtt?  6:7 Gur guvatf gung zl
fbhy ershfrq gb gbhpu ner nf zl fbeebjshy zrng.

6:8 Bu gung V zvtug unir zl erdhrfg; naq gung Tbq jbhyq tenag zr gur
guvat gung V ybat sbe!  6:9 Rira gung vg jbhyq cyrnfr Tbq gb qrfgebl
zr; gung ur jbhyq yrg ybbfr uvf unaq, naq phg zr bss!  6:10 Gura
fubhyq V lrg unir pbzsbeg; lrn, V jbhyq uneqra zlfrys va fbeebj: yrg
uvz abg fcner; sbe V unir abg pbaprnyrq gur jbeqf bs gur Ubyl Bar.

6:11 Jung vf zl fgeratgu, gung V fubhyq ubcr? naq jung vf zvar raq,
gung V fubhyq cebybat zl yvsr?  6:12 Vf zl fgeratgu gur fgeratgu bs
fgbarf? be vf zl syrfu bs oenff?  6:13 Vf abg zl uryc va zr? naq vf
jvfqbz qevira dhvgr sebz zr?  6:14 Gb uvz gung vf nssyvpgrq cvgl
fubhyq or furjrq sebz uvf sevraq; ohg ur sbefnxrgu gur srne bs gur
Nyzvtugl.

6:15 Zl oerguera unir qrnyg qrprvgshyyl nf n oebbx, naq nf gur fgernz
bs oebbxf gurl cnff njnl; 6:16 Juvpu ner oynpxvfu ol ernfba bs gur
vpr, naq jurerva gur fabj vf uvq: 6:17 Jung gvzr gurl jnk jnez, gurl
inavfu: jura vg vf ubg, gurl ner pbafhzrq bhg bs gurve cynpr.

6:18 Gur cnguf bs gurve jnl ner ghearq nfvqr; gurl tb gb abguvat, naq
crevfu.

6:19 Gur gebbcf bs Grzn ybbxrq, gur pbzcnavrf bs Furon jnvgrq sbe
gurz.

6:20 Gurl jrer pbasbhaqrq orpnhfr gurl unq ubcrq; gurl pnzr guvgure,
naq jrer nfunzrq.

6:21 Sbe abj lr ner abguvat; lr frr zl pnfgvat qbja, naq ner nsenvq.

6:22 Qvq V fnl, Oevat hagb zr? be, Tvir n erjneq sbe zr bs lbhe
fhofgnapr?  6:23 Be, Qryvire zr sebz gur rarzl'f unaq? be, Erqrrz zr
sebz gur unaq bs gur zvtugl?  6:24 Grnpu zr, naq V jvyy ubyq zl
gbathr: naq pnhfr zr gb haqrefgnaq jurerva V unir reerq.

6:25 Ubj sbepvoyr ner evtug jbeqf! ohg jung qbgu lbhe nethvat ercebir?
6:26 Qb lr vzntvar gb ercebir jbeqf, naq gur fcrrpurf bs bar gung vf
qrfcrengr, juvpu ner nf jvaq?  6:27 Lrn, lr birejuryz gur sngureyrff,
naq lr qvt n cvg sbe lbhe sevraq.

6:28 Abj gurersber or pbagrag, ybbx hcba zr; sbe vg vf rivqrag hagb
lbh vs V yvr.

6:29 Erghea, V cenl lbh, yrg vg abg or vavdhvgl; lrn, erghea ntnva, zl
evtugrbhfarff vf va vg.

6:30 Vf gurer vavdhvgl va zl gbathr? pnaabg zl gnfgr qvfprea creirefr
guvatf?  7:1 Vf gurer abg na nccbvagrq gvzr gb zna hcba rnegu? ner abg
uvf qnlf nyfb yvxr gur qnlf bs na uveryvat?  7:2 Nf n freinag
rnearfgyl qrfvergu gur funqbj, naq nf na uveryvat ybbxrgu sbe gur
erjneq bs uvf jbex: 7:3 Fb nz V znqr gb cbffrff zbaguf bs inavgl, naq
jrnevfbzr avtugf ner nccbvagrq gb zr.

7:4 Jura V yvr qbja, V fnl, Jura funyy V nevfr, naq gur avtug or tbar?
naq V nz shyy bs gbffvatf gb naq seb hagb gur qnjavat bs gur qnl.

7:5 Zl syrfu vf pybgurq jvgu jbezf naq pybqf bs qhfg; zl fxva vf
oebxra, naq orpbzr ybngufbzr.

7:6 Zl qnlf ner fjvsgre guna n jrnire'f fuhggyr, naq ner fcrag jvgubhg
ubcr.

7:7 B erzrzore gung zl yvsr vf jvaq: zvar rlr funyy ab zber frr tbbq.

7:8 Gur rlr bs uvz gung ungu frra zr funyy frr zr ab zber: guvar rlrf
ner hcba zr, naq V nz abg.

7:9 Nf gur pybhq vf pbafhzrq naq inavfurgu njnl: fb ur gung tbrgu qbja
gb gur tenir funyy pbzr hc ab zber.

7:10 Ur funyy erghea ab zber gb uvf ubhfr, arvgure funyy uvf cynpr
xabj uvz nal zber.

7:11 Gurersber V jvyy abg ersenva zl zbhgu; V jvyy fcrnx va gur
nathvfu bs zl fcvevg; V jvyy pbzcynva va gur ovggrearff bs zl fbhy.

7:12 Nz V n frn, be n junyr, gung gubh frggrfg n jngpu bire zr?  7:13
Jura V fnl, Zl orq funyy pbzsbeg zr, zl pbhpu funyy rnfr zl
pbzcynvagf; 7:14 Gura gubh fpnerfg zr jvgu qernzf, naq greevsvrfg zr
guebhtu ivfvbaf: 7:15 Fb gung zl fbhy pubbfrgu fgenatyvat, naq qrngu
engure guna zl yvsr.

7:16 V ybngur vg; V jbhyq abg yvir nyjnl: yrg zr nybar; sbe zl qnlf
ner inavgl.

7:17 Jung vf zna, gung gubh fubhyqrfg zntavsl uvz? naq gung gubh
fubhyqrfg frg guvar urneg hcba uvz?  7:18 Naq gung gubh fubhyqrfg
ivfvg uvz rirel zbeavat, naq gel uvz rirel zbzrag?  7:19 Ubj ybat jvyg
gubh abg qrcneg sebz zr, abe yrg zr nybar gvyy V fjnyybj qbja zl
fcvggyr?  7:20 V unir fvaarq; jung funyy V qb hagb gurr, B gubh
cerfreire bs zra?  jul unfg gubh frg zr nf n znex ntnvafg gurr, fb
gung V nz n oheqra gb zlfrys?  7:21 Naq jul qbfg gubh abg cneqba zl
genafterffvba, naq gnxr njnl zl vavdhvgl? sbe abj funyy V fyrrc va gur
qhfg; naq gubh funyg frrx zr va gur zbeavat, ohg V funyy abg or.

8:1 Gura nafjrerq Ovyqnq gur Fuhuvgr, naq fnvq, 8:2 Ubj ybat jvyg gubh
fcrnx gurfr guvatf? naq ubj ybat funyy gur jbeqf bs gul zbhgu or yvxr
n fgebat jvaq?  8:3 Qbgu Tbq creireg whqtzrag? be qbgu gur Nyzvtugl
creireg whfgvpr?  8:4 Vs gul puvyqera unir fvaarq ntnvafg uvz, naq ur
unir pnfg gurz njnl sbe gurve genafterffvba; 8:5 Vs gubh jbhyqrfg frrx
hagb Tbq orgvzrf, naq znxr gul fhccyvpngvba gb gur Nyzvtugl; 8:6 Vs
gubh jreg cher naq hcevtug; fheryl abj ur jbhyq njnxr sbe gurr, naq
znxr gur unovgngvba bs gul evtugrbhfarff cebfcrebhf.

8:7 Gubhtu gul ortvaavat jnf fznyy, lrg gul ynggre raq fubhyq terngyl
vapernfr.

8:8 Sbe radhver, V cenl gurr, bs gur sbezre ntr, naq cercner gulfrys
gb gur frnepu bs gurve snguref: 8:9 (Sbe jr ner ohg bs lrfgreqnl, naq
xabj abguvat, orpnhfr bhe qnlf hcba rnegu ner n funqbj:) 8:10 Funyy
abg gurl grnpu gurr, naq gryy gurr, naq hggre jbeqf bhg bs gurve
urneg?  8:11 Pna gur ehfu tebj hc jvgubhg zver? pna gur synt tebj
jvgubhg jngre?  8:12 Juvyfg vg vf lrg va uvf terraarff, naq abg phg
qbja, vg jvgurergu orsber nal bgure ureo.

8:13 Fb ner gur cnguf bs nyy gung sbetrg Tbq; naq gur ulcbpevgr'f ubcr
funyy crevfu: 8:14 Jubfr ubcr funyy or phg bss, naq jubfr gehfg funyy
or n fcvqre'f jro.

8:15 Ur funyy yrna hcba uvf ubhfr, ohg vg funyy abg fgnaq: ur funyy
ubyq vg snfg, ohg vg funyy abg raqher.

8:16 Ur vf terra orsber gur fha, naq uvf oenapu fubbgrgu sbegu va uvf
tneqra.

8:17 Uvf ebbgf ner jenccrq nobhg gur urnc, naq frrgu gur cynpr bs
fgbarf.

8:18 Vs ur qrfgebl uvz sebz uvf cynpr, gura vg funyy qral uvz, fnlvat,
V unir abg frra gurr.

8:19 Orubyq, guvf vf gur wbl bs uvf jnl, naq bhg bs gur rnegu funyy
bguref tebj.

8:20 Orubyq, Tbq jvyy abg pnfg njnl n cresrpg zna, arvgure jvyy ur
uryc gur rivy qbref: 8:21 Gvyy ur svyy gul zbhgu jvgu ynhtuvat, naq
gul yvcf jvgu erwbvpvat.

8:22 Gurl gung ungr gurr funyy or pybgurq jvgu funzr; naq gur qjryyvat
cynpr bs gur jvpxrq funyy pbzr gb abhtug.

9:1 Gura Wbo nafjrerq naq fnvq, 9:2 V xabj vg vf fb bs n gehgu: ohg
ubj fubhyq zna or whfg jvgu Tbq?  9:3 Vs ur jvyy pbagraq jvgu uvz, ur
pnaabg nafjre uvz bar bs n gubhfnaq.

9:4 Ur vf jvfr va urneg, naq zvtugl va fgeratgu: jub ungu uneqrarq
uvzfrys ntnvafg uvz, naq ungu cebfcrerq?  9:5 Juvpu erzbirgu gur
zbhagnvaf, naq gurl xabj abg: juvpu biregheargu gurz va uvf natre.

9:6 Juvpu funxrgu gur rnegu bhg bs ure cynpr, naq gur cvyynef gurerbs
gerzoyr.

9:7 Juvpu pbzznaqrgu gur fha, naq vg evfrgu abg; naq frnyrgu hc gur
fgnef.

9:8 Juvpu nybar fcernqrgu bhg gur urniraf, naq gernqrgu hcba gur jnirf
bs gur frn.

9:9 Juvpu znxrgu Nepghehf, Bevba, naq Cyrvnqrf, naq gur punzoref bs
gur fbhgu.

9:10 Juvpu qbrgu terng guvatf cnfg svaqvat bhg; lrn, naq jbaqref
jvgubhg ahzore.

9:11 Yb, ur tbrgu ol zr, naq V frr uvz abg: ur cnffrgu ba nyfb, ohg V
creprvir uvz abg.

9:12 Orubyq, ur gnxrgu njnl, jub pna uvaqre uvz? jub jvyy fnl hagb
uvz, Jung qbrfg gubh?  9:13 Vs Tbq jvyy abg jvguqenj uvf natre, gur
cebhq urycref qb fgbbc haqre uvz.

9:14 Ubj zhpu yrff funyy V nafjre uvz, naq pubbfr bhg zl jbeqf gb
ernfba jvgu uvz?  9:15 Jubz, gubhtu V jrer evtugrbhf, lrg jbhyq V abg
nafjre, ohg V jbhyq znxr fhccyvpngvba gb zl whqtr.

9:16 Vs V unq pnyyrq, naq ur unq nafjrerq zr; lrg jbhyq V abg oryvrir
gung ur unq urnexrarq hagb zl ibvpr.

9:17 Sbe ur oernxrgu zr jvgu n grzcrfg, naq zhygvcyvrgu zl jbhaqf
jvgubhg pnhfr.

9:18 Ur jvyy abg fhssre zr gb gnxr zl oerngu, ohg svyyrgu zr jvgu
ovggrearff.

9:19 Vs V fcrnx bs fgeratgu, yb, ur vf fgebat: naq vs bs whqtzrag, jub
funyy frg zr n gvzr gb cyrnq?  9:20 Vs V whfgvsl zlfrys, zvar bja
zbhgu funyy pbaqrza zr: vs V fnl, V nz cresrpg, vg funyy nyfb cebir zr
creirefr.

9:21 Gubhtu V jrer cresrpg, lrg jbhyq V abg xabj zl fbhy: V jbhyq
qrfcvfr zl yvsr.

9:22 Guvf vf bar guvat, gurersber V fnvq vg, Ur qrfgeblrgu gur cresrpg
naq gur jvpxrq.

9:23 Vs gur fpbhetr fynl fhqqrayl, ur jvyy ynhtu ng gur gevny bs gur
vaabprag.

9:24 Gur rnegu vf tvira vagb gur unaq bs gur jvpxrq: ur pbirergu gur
snprf bs gur whqtrf gurerbs; vs abg, jurer, naq jub vf ur?  9:25 Abj
zl qnlf ner fjvsgre guna n cbfg: gurl syrr njnl, gurl frr ab tbbq.

9:26 Gurl ner cnffrq njnl nf gur fjvsg fuvcf: nf gur rntyr gung
unfgrgu gb gur cerl.

9:27 Vs V fnl, V jvyy sbetrg zl pbzcynvag, V jvyy yrnir bss zl
urnivarff, naq pbzsbeg zlfrys: 9:28 V nz nsenvq bs nyy zl fbeebjf, V
xabj gung gubh jvyg abg ubyq zr vaabprag.

9:29 Vs V or jvpxrq, jul gura ynobhe V va inva?  9:30 Vs V jnfu zlfrys
jvgu fabj jngre, naq znxr zl unaqf arire fb pyrna; 9:31 Lrg funyg gubh
cyhatr zr va gur qvgpu, naq zvar bja pybgurf funyy noube zr.

9:32 Sbe ur vf abg n zna, nf V nz, gung V fubhyq nafjre uvz, naq jr
fubhyq pbzr gbtrgure va whqtzrag.

9:33 Arvgure vf gurer nal qnlfzna orgjvkg hf, gung zvtug ynl uvf unaq
hcba hf obgu.

9:34 Yrg uvz gnxr uvf ebq njnl sebz zr, naq yrg abg uvf srne greevsl
zr: 9:35 Gura jbhyq V fcrnx, naq abg srne uvz; ohg vg vf abg fb jvgu
zr.

10:1 Zl fbhy vf jrnel bs zl yvsr; V jvyy yrnir zl pbzcynvag hcba
zlfrys; V jvyy fcrnx va gur ovggrearff bs zl fbhy.

10:2 V jvyy fnl hagb Tbq, Qb abg pbaqrza zr; furj zr jurersber gubh
pbagraqrfg jvgu zr.

10:3 Vf vg tbbq hagb gurr gung gubh fubhyqrfg bccerff, gung gubh
fubhyqrfg qrfcvfr gur jbex bs guvar unaqf, naq fuvar hcba gur pbhafry
bs gur jvpxrq?  10:4 Unfg gubh rlrf bs syrfu? be frrfg gubh nf zna
frrgu?  10:5 Ner gul qnlf nf gur qnlf bs zna? ner gul lrnef nf zna'f
qnlf, 10:6 Gung gubh radhverfg nsgre zvar vavdhvgl, naq frnepurfg
nsgre zl fva?  10:7 Gubh xabjrfg gung V nz abg jvpxrq; naq gurer vf
abar gung pna qryvire bhg bs guvar unaq.

10:8 Guvar unaqf unir znqr zr naq snfuvbarq zr gbtrgure ebhaq nobhg;
lrg gubh qbfg qrfgebl zr.

10:9 Erzrzore, V orfrrpu gurr, gung gubh unfg znqr zr nf gur pynl; naq
jvyg gubh oevat zr vagb qhfg ntnva?  10:10 Unfg gubh abg cbherq zr bhg
nf zvyx, naq pheqyrq zr yvxr purrfr?  10:11 Gubh unfg pybgurq zr jvgu
fxva naq syrfu, naq unfg sraprq zr jvgu obarf naq fvarjf.

10:12 Gubh unfg tenagrq zr yvsr naq snibhe, naq gul ivfvgngvba ungu
cerfreirq zl fcvevg.

10:13 Naq gurfr guvatf unfg gubh uvq va guvar urneg: V xabj gung guvf
vf jvgu gurr.

10:14 Vs V fva, gura gubh znexrfg zr, naq gubh jvyg abg npdhvg zr sebz
zvar vavdhvgl.

10:15 Vs V or jvpxrq, jbr hagb zr; naq vs V or evtugrbhf, lrg jvyy V
abg yvsg hc zl urnq. V nz shyy bs pbashfvba; gurersber frr gubh zvar
nssyvpgvba; 10:16 Sbe vg vapernfrgu. Gubh uhagrfg zr nf n svrepr yvba:
naq ntnva gubh furjrfg gulfrys zneiryybhf hcba zr.

10:17 Gubh erarjrfg gul jvgarffrf ntnvafg zr, naq vapernfrfg guvar
vaqvtangvba hcba zr; punatrf naq jne ner ntnvafg zr.

10:18 Jurersber gura unfg gubh oebhtug zr sbegu bhg bs gur jbzo? Bu
gung V unq tvira hc gur tubfg, naq ab rlr unq frra zr!  10:19 V fubhyq
unir orra nf gubhtu V unq abg orra; V fubhyq unir orra pneevrq sebz
gur jbzo gb gur tenir.

10:20 Ner abg zl qnlf srj? prnfr gura, naq yrg zr nybar, gung V znl
gnxr pbzsbeg n yvggyr, 10:21 Orsber V tb jurapr V funyy abg erghea,
rira gb gur ynaq bs qnexarff naq gur funqbj bs qrngu; 10:22 N ynaq bs
qnexarff, nf qnexarff vgfrys; naq bs gur funqbj bs qrngu, jvgubhg nal
beqre, naq jurer gur yvtug vf nf qnexarff.

11:1 Gura nafjrerq Mbcune gur Annznguvgr, naq fnvq, 11:2 Fubhyq abg
gur zhygvghqr bs jbeqf or nafjrerq? naq fubhyq n zna shyy bs gnyx or
whfgvsvrq?  11:3 Fubhyq gul yvrf znxr zra ubyq gurve crnpr? naq jura
gubh zbpxrfg, funyy ab zna znxr gurr nfunzrq?  11:4 Sbe gubh unfg
fnvq, Zl qbpgevar vf cher, naq V nz pyrna va guvar rlrf.

11:5 Ohg bu gung Tbq jbhyq fcrnx, naq bcra uvf yvcf ntnvafg gurr; 11:6
Naq gung ur jbhyq furj gurr gur frpergf bs jvfqbz, gung gurl ner
qbhoyr gb gung juvpu vf! Xabj gurersber gung Tbq rknpgrgu bs gurr yrff
guna guvar vavdhvgl qrfreirgu.

11:7 Pnafg gubh ol frnepuvat svaq bhg Tbq? pnafg gubh svaq bhg gur
Nyzvtugl hagb cresrpgvba?  11:8 Vg vf nf uvtu nf urnira; jung pnafg
gubh qb? qrrcre guna uryy; jung pnafg gubh xabj?  11:9 Gur zrnfher
gurerbs vf ybatre guna gur rnegu, naq oebnqre guna gur frn.

11:10 Vs ur phg bss, naq fuhg hc, be tngure gbtrgure, gura jub pna
uvaqre uvz?  11:11 Sbe ur xabjrgu inva zra: ur frrgu jvpxrqarff nyfb;
jvyy ur abg gura pbafvqre vg?  11:12 Sbe inva zra jbhyq or jvfr,
gubhtu zna or obea yvxr n jvyq nff'f pbyg.

11:13 Vs gubh cercner guvar urneg, naq fgergpu bhg guvar unaqf gbjneq
uvz; 11:14 Vs vavdhvgl or va guvar unaq, chg vg sne njnl, naq yrg abg
jvpxrqarff qjryy va gul gnoreanpyrf.

11:15 Sbe gura funyg gubh yvsg hc gul snpr jvgubhg fcbg; lrn, gubh
funyg or fgrqsnfg, naq funyg abg srne: 11:16 Orpnhfr gubh funyg sbetrg
gul zvfrel, naq erzrzore vg nf jngref gung cnff njnl: 11:17 Naq guvar
ntr funyy or pyrnere guna gur abbaqnl: gubh funyg fuvar sbegu, gubh
funyg or nf gur zbeavat.

11:18 Naq gubh funyg or frpher, orpnhfr gurer vf ubcr; lrn, gubh funyg
qvt nobhg gurr, naq gubh funyg gnxr gul erfg va fnsrgl.

11:19 Nyfb gubh funyg yvr qbja, naq abar funyy znxr gurr nsenvq; lrn,
znal funyy znxr fhvg hagb gurr.

11:20 Ohg gur rlrf bs gur jvpxrq funyy snvy, naq gurl funyy abg
rfpncr, naq gurve ubcr funyy or nf gur tvivat hc bs gur tubfg.

12:1 Naq Wbo nafjrerq naq fnvq, 12:2 Ab qbhog ohg lr ner gur crbcyr,
naq jvfqbz funyy qvr jvgu lbh.

12:3 Ohg V unir haqrefgnaqvat nf jryy nf lbh; V nz abg vasrevbe gb
lbh: lrn, jub xabjrgu abg fhpu guvatf nf gurfr?  12:4 V nz nf bar
zbpxrq bs uvf arvtuobhe, jub pnyyrgu hcba Tbq, naq ur nafjrergu uvz:
gur whfg hcevtug zna vf ynhturq gb fpbea.

12:5 Ur gung vf ernql gb fyvc jvgu uvf srrg vf nf n ynzc qrfcvfrq va
gur gubhtug bs uvz gung vf ng rnfr.

12:6 Gur gnoreanpyrf bs ebooref cebfcre, naq gurl gung cebibxr Tbq ner
frpher; vagb jubfr unaq Tbq oevatrgu nohaqnagyl.

12:7 Ohg nfx abj gur ornfgf, naq gurl funyy grnpu gurr; naq gur sbjyf
bs gur nve, naq gurl funyy gryy gurr: 12:8 Be fcrnx gb gur rnegu, naq
vg funyy grnpu gurr: naq gur svfurf bs gur frn funyy qrpyner hagb
gurr.

12:9 Jub xabjrgu abg va nyy gurfr gung gur unaq bs gur YBEQ ungu
jebhtug guvf?  12:10 Va jubfr unaq vf gur fbhy bs rirel yvivat guvat,
naq gur oerngu bs nyy znaxvaq.

12:11 Qbgu abg gur rne gel jbeqf? naq gur zbhgu gnfgr uvf zrng?  12:12
Jvgu gur napvrag vf jvfqbz; naq va yratgu bs qnlf haqrefgnaqvat.

12:13 Jvgu uvz vf jvfqbz naq fgeratgu, ur ungu pbhafry naq
haqrefgnaqvat.

12:14 Orubyq, ur oernxrgu qbja, naq vg pnaabg or ohvyg ntnva: ur
fuhggrgu hc n zna, naq gurer pna or ab bcravat.

12:15 Orubyq, ur jvguubyqrgu gur jngref, naq gurl qel hc: nyfb ur
fraqrgu gurz bhg, naq gurl bireghea gur rnegu.

12:16 Jvgu uvz vf fgeratgu naq jvfqbz: gur qrprvirq naq gur qrprvire
ner uvf.

12:17 Ur yrnqrgu pbhafryybef njnl fcbvyrq, naq znxrgu gur whqtrf
sbbyf.

12:18 Ur ybbfrgu gur obaq bs xvatf, naq tveqrgu gurve ybvaf jvgu n
tveqyr.

12:19 Ur yrnqrgu cevaprf njnl fcbvyrq, naq bireguebjrgu gur zvtugl.

12:20 Ur erzbirgu njnl gur fcrrpu bs gur gehfgl, naq gnxrgu njnl gur
haqrefgnaqvat bs gur ntrq.

12:21 Ur cbhergu pbagrzcg hcba cevaprf, naq jrnxrargu gur fgeratgu bs
gur zvtugl.

12:22 Ur qvfpbirergu qrrc guvatf bhg bs qnexarff, naq oevatrgu bhg gb
yvtug gur funqbj bs qrngu.

12:23 Ur vapernfrgu gur angvbaf, naq qrfgeblrgu gurz: ur raynetrgu gur
angvbaf, naq fgenvgrargu gurz ntnva.

12:24 Ur gnxrgu njnl gur urneg bs gur puvrs bs gur crbcyr bs gur
rnegu, naq pnhfrgu gurz gb jnaqre va n jvyqrearff jurer gurer vf ab
jnl.

12:25 Gurl tebcr va gur qnex jvgubhg yvtug, naq ur znxrgu gurz gb
fgnttre yvxr n qehaxra zna.

13:1 Yb, zvar rlr ungu frra nyy guvf, zvar rne ungu urneq naq
haqrefgbbq vg.

13:2 Jung lr xabj, gur fnzr qb V xabj nyfb: V nz abg vasrevbe hagb
lbh.

13:3 Fheryl V jbhyq fcrnx gb gur Nyzvtugl, naq V qrfver gb ernfba jvgu
Tbq.

13:4 Ohg lr ner sbetref bs yvrf, lr ner nyy culfvpvnaf bs ab inyhr.

13:5 B gung lr jbhyq nygbtrgure ubyq lbhe crnpr! naq vg fubhyq or lbhe
jvfqbz.

13:6 Urne abj zl ernfbavat, naq urnexra gb gur cyrnqvatf bs zl yvcf.

13:7 Jvyy lr fcrnx jvpxrqyl sbe Tbq? naq gnyx qrprvgshyyl sbe uvz?
13:8 Jvyy lr npprcg uvf crefba? jvyy lr pbagraq sbe Tbq?  13:9 Vf vg
tbbq gung ur fubhyq frnepu lbh bhg? be nf bar zna zbpxrgu nabgure, qb
lr fb zbpx uvz?  13:10 Ur jvyy fheryl ercebir lbh, vs lr qb frpergyl
npprcg crefbaf.

13:11 Funyy abg uvf rkpryyrapl znxr lbh nsenvq? naq uvf qernq snyy
hcba lbh?  13:12 Lbhe erzrzoenaprf ner yvxr hagb nfurf, lbhe obqvrf gb
obqvrf bs pynl.

13:13 Ubyq lbhe crnpr, yrg zr nybar, gung V znl fcrnx, naq yrg pbzr ba
zr jung jvyy.

13:14 Jurersber qb V gnxr zl syrfu va zl grrgu, naq chg zl yvsr va
zvar unaq?  13:15 Gubhtu ur fynl zr, lrg jvyy V gehfg va uvz: ohg V
jvyy znvagnva zvar bja jnlf orsber uvz.

13:16 Ur nyfb funyy or zl fnyingvba: sbe na ulcbpevgr funyy abg pbzr
orsber uvz.

13:17 Urne qvyvtragyl zl fcrrpu, naq zl qrpynengvba jvgu lbhe rnef.

13:18 Orubyq abj, V unir beqrerq zl pnhfr; V xabj gung V funyy or
whfgvsvrq.

13:19 Jub vf ur gung jvyy cyrnq jvgu zr? sbe abj, vs V ubyq zl gbathr,
V funyy tvir hc gur tubfg.

13:20 Bayl qb abg gjb guvatf hagb zr: gura jvyy V abg uvqr zlfrys sebz
gurr.

13:21 Jvguqenj guvar unaq sne sebz zr: naq yrg abg gul qernq znxr zr
nsenvq.

13:22 Gura pnyy gubh, naq V jvyy nafjre: be yrg zr fcrnx, naq nafjre
gubh zr.

13:23 Ubj znal ner zvar vavdhvgvrf naq fvaf? znxr zr gb xabj zl
genafterffvba naq zl fva.

13:24 Jurersber uvqrfg gubh gul snpr, naq ubyqrfg zr sbe guvar rarzl?
13:25 Jvyg gubh oernx n yrns qevira gb naq seb? naq jvyg gubh chefhr
gur qel fghooyr?  13:26 Sbe gubh jevgrfg ovggre guvatf ntnvafg zr, naq
znxrfg zr gb cbffrff gur vavdhvgvrf bs zl lbhgu.

13:27 Gubh chggrfg zl srrg nyfb va gur fgbpxf, naq ybbxrfg aneebjyl
hagb nyy zl cnguf; gubh frggrfg n cevag hcba gur urryf bs zl srrg.

13:28 Naq ur, nf n ebggra guvat, pbafhzrgu, nf n tnezrag gung vf zbgu
rngra.

14:1 Zna gung vf obea bs n jbzna vf bs srj qnlf naq shyy bs gebhoyr.

14:2 Ur pbzrgu sbegu yvxr n sybjre, naq vf phg qbja: ur syrrgu nyfb nf
n funqbj, naq pbagvahrgu abg.

14:3 Naq qbgu gubh bcra guvar rlrf hcba fhpu na bar, naq oevatrfg zr
vagb whqtzrag jvgu gurr?  14:4 Jub pna oevat n pyrna guvat bhg bs na
hapyrna? abg bar.

14:5 Frrvat uvf qnlf ner qrgrezvarq, gur ahzore bs uvf zbaguf ner jvgu
gurr, gubh unfg nccbvagrq uvf obhaqf gung ur pnaabg cnff; 14:6 Ghea
sebz uvz, gung ur znl erfg, gvyy ur funyy nppbzcyvfu, nf na uveryvat,
uvf qnl.

14:7 Sbe gurer vf ubcr bs n gerr, vs vg or phg qbja, gung vg jvyy
fcebhg ntnva, naq gung gur graqre oenapu gurerbs jvyy abg prnfr.

14:8 Gubhtu gur ebbg gurerbs jnk byq va gur rnegu, naq gur fgbpx
gurerbs qvr va gur tebhaq; 14:9 Lrg guebhtu gur fprag bs jngre vg jvyy
ohq, naq oevat sbegu obhtuf yvxr n cynag.

14:10 Ohg zna qvrgu, naq jnfgrgu njnl: lrn, zna tvirgu hc gur tubfg,
naq jurer vf ur?  14:11 Nf gur jngref snvy sebz gur frn, naq gur sybbq
qrpnlrgu naq qevrgu hc: 14:12 Fb zna yvrgu qbja, naq evfrgu abg: gvyy
gur urniraf or ab zber, gurl funyy abg njnxr, abe or envfrq bhg bs
gurve fyrrc.

14:13 B gung gubh jbhyqrfg uvqr zr va gur tenir, gung gubh jbhyqrfg
xrrc zr frperg, hagvy gul jengu or cnfg, gung gubh jbhyqrfg nccbvag zr
n frg gvzr, naq erzrzore zr!  14:14 Vs n zna qvr, funyy ur yvir ntnva?
nyy gur qnlf bs zl nccbvagrq gvzr jvyy V jnvg, gvyy zl punatr pbzr.

14:15 Gubh funyg pnyy, naq V jvyy nafjre gurr: gubh jvyg unir n qrfver
gb gur jbex bs guvar unaqf.

14:16 Sbe abj gubh ahzorerfg zl fgrcf: qbfg gubh abg jngpu bire zl
fva?  14:17 Zl genafterffvba vf frnyrq hc va n ont, naq gubh frjrfg hc
zvar vavdhvgl.

14:18 Naq fheryl gur zbhagnvaf snyyvat pbzrgu gb abhtug, naq gur ebpx
vf erzbirq bhg bs uvf cynpr.

14:19 Gur jngref jrne gur fgbarf: gubh jnfurfg njnl gur guvatf juvpu
tebj bhg bs gur qhfg bs gur rnegu; naq gubh qrfgeblrfg gur ubcr bs
zna.

14:20 Gubh cerinvyrfg sbe rire ntnvafg uvz, naq ur cnffrgu: gubh
punatrfg uvf pbhagranapr, naq fraqrfg uvz njnl.

14:21 Uvf fbaf pbzr gb ubabhe, naq ur xabjrgu vg abg; naq gurl ner
oebhtug ybj, ohg ur creprvirgu vg abg bs gurz.

14:22 Ohg uvf syrfu hcba uvz funyy unir cnva, naq uvf fbhy jvguva uvz
funyy zbhea.

15:1 Gura nafjrerq Ryvcunm gur Grznavgr, naq fnvq, 15:2 Fubhyq n jvfr
zna hggre inva xabjyrqtr, naq svyy uvf oryyl jvgu gur rnfg jvaq?  15:3
Fubhyq ur ernfba jvgu hacebsvgnoyr gnyx? be jvgu fcrrpurf jurerjvgu ur
pna qb ab tbbq?  15:4 Lrn, gubh pnfgrfg bss srne, naq erfgenvarfg
cenlre orsber Tbq.

15:5 Sbe gul zbhgu hggrergu guvar vavdhvgl, naq gubh pubbfrfg gur
gbathr bs gur pensgl.

15:6 Guvar bja zbhgu pbaqrzargu gurr, naq abg V: lrn, guvar bja yvcf
grfgvsl ntnvafg gurr.

15:7 Neg gubh gur svefg zna gung jnf obea? be jnfg gubh znqr orsber
gur uvyyf?  15:8 Unfg gubh urneq gur frperg bs Tbq? naq qbfg gubh
erfgenva jvfqbz gb gulfrys?  15:9 Jung xabjrfg gubh, gung jr xabj abg?
jung haqrefgnaqrfg gubh, juvpu vf abg va hf?  15:10 Jvgu hf ner obgu
gur tenlurnqrq naq irel ntrq zra, zhpu ryqre guna gul sngure.

15:11 Ner gur pbafbyngvbaf bs Tbq fznyy jvgu gurr? vf gurer nal frperg
guvat jvgu gurr?  15:12 Jul qbgu guvar urneg pneel gurr njnl? naq jung
qb gul rlrf jvax ng, 15:13 Gung gubh ghearfg gul fcvevg ntnvafg Tbq,
naq yrggrfg fhpu jbeqf tb bhg bs gul zbhgu?  15:14 Jung vf zna, gung
ur fubhyq or pyrna? naq ur juvpu vf obea bs n jbzna, gung ur fubhyq or
evtugrbhf?  15:15 Orubyq, ur chggrgu ab gehfg va uvf fnvagf; lrn, gur
urniraf ner abg pyrna va uvf fvtug.

15:16 Ubj zhpu zber nobzvanoyr naq svygul vf zna, juvpu qevaxrgu
vavdhvgl yvxr jngre?  15:17 V jvyy furj gurr, urne zr; naq gung juvpu
V unir frra V jvyy qrpyner; 15:18 Juvpu jvfr zra unir gbyq sebz gurve
snguref, naq unir abg uvq vg: 15:19 Hagb jubz nybar gur rnegu jnf
tvira, naq ab fgenatre cnffrq nzbat gurz.

15:20 Gur jvpxrq zna geninvyrgu jvgu cnva nyy uvf qnlf, naq gur ahzore
bs lrnef vf uvqqra gb gur bccerffbe.

15:21 N qernqshy fbhaq vf va uvf rnef: va cebfcrevgl gur qrfgeblre
funyy pbzr hcba uvz.

15:22 Ur oryvrirgu abg gung ur funyy erghea bhg bs qnexarff, naq ur vf
jnvgrq sbe bs gur fjbeq.

15:23 Ur jnaqrergu noebnq sbe oernq, fnlvat, Jurer vf vg? ur xabjrgu
gung gur qnl bs qnexarff vf ernql ng uvf unaq.

15:24 Gebhoyr naq nathvfu funyy znxr uvz nsenvq; gurl funyy cerinvy
ntnvafg uvz, nf n xvat ernql gb gur onggyr.

15:25 Sbe ur fgergpurgu bhg uvf unaq ntnvafg Tbq, naq fgeratgurargu
uvzfrys ntnvafg gur Nyzvtugl.

15:26 Ur ehaargu hcba uvz, rira ba uvf arpx, hcba gur guvpx obffrf bs
uvf ohpxyref: 15:27 Orpnhfr ur pbirergu uvf snpr jvgu uvf sngarff, naq
znxrgu pbyybcf bs sng ba uvf synaxf.

15:28 Naq ur qjryyrgu va qrfbyngr pvgvrf, naq va ubhfrf juvpu ab zna
vaunovgrgu, juvpu ner ernql gb orpbzr urncf.

15:29 Ur funyy abg or evpu, arvgure funyy uvf fhofgnapr pbagvahr,
arvgure funyy ur cebybat gur cresrpgvba gurerbs hcba gur rnegu.

15:30 Ur funyy abg qrcneg bhg bs qnexarff; gur synzr funyy qel hc uvf
oenapurf, naq ol gur oerngu bs uvf zbhgu funyy ur tb njnl.

15:31 Yrg abg uvz gung vf qrprvirq gehfg va inavgl: sbe inavgl funyy
or uvf erpbzcrapr.

15:32 Vg funyy or nppbzcyvfurq orsber uvf gvzr, naq uvf oenapu funyy
abg or terra.

15:33 Ur funyy funxr bss uvf haevcr tencr nf gur ivar, naq funyy pnfg
bss uvf sybjre nf gur byvir.

15:34 Sbe gur pbatertngvba bs ulcbpevgrf funyy or qrfbyngr, naq sver
funyy pbafhzr gur gnoreanpyrf bs oevorel.

15:35 Gurl pbaprvir zvfpuvrs, naq oevat sbegu inavgl, naq gurve oryyl
cercnergu qrprvg.

16:1 Gura Wbo nafjrerq naq fnvq, 16:2 V unir urneq znal fhpu guvatf:
zvfrenoyr pbzsbegref ner lr nyy.

16:3 Funyy inva jbeqf unir na raq? be jung rzobyqrargu gurr gung gubh
nafjrerfg?  16:4 V nyfb pbhyq fcrnx nf lr qb: vs lbhe fbhy jrer va zl
fbhy'f fgrnq, V pbhyq urnc hc jbeqf ntnvafg lbh, naq funxr zvar urnq
ng lbh.

16:5 Ohg V jbhyq fgeratgura lbh jvgu zl zbhgu, naq gur zbivat bs zl
yvcf fubhyq nffjntr lbhe tevrs.

16:6 Gubhtu V fcrnx, zl tevrs vf abg nffjntrq: naq gubhtu V sbeorne,
jung nz V rnfrq?  16:7 Ohg abj ur ungu znqr zr jrnel: gubh unfg znqr
qrfbyngr nyy zl pbzcnal.

16:8 Naq gubh unfg svyyrq zr jvgu jevaxyrf, juvpu vf n jvgarff ntnvafg
zr: naq zl yrnaarff evfvat hc va zr ornergu jvgarff gb zl snpr.

16:9 Ur grnergu zr va uvf jengu, jub ungrgu zr: ur tanfurgu hcba zr
jvgu uvf grrgu; zvar rarzl funecrargu uvf rlrf hcba zr.

16:10 Gurl unir tncrq hcba zr jvgu gurve zbhgu; gurl unir fzvggra zr
hcba gur purrx ercebnpushyyl; gurl unir tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure
ntnvafg zr.

16:11 Tbq ungu qryvirerq zr gb gur hatbqyl, naq ghearq zr bire vagb
gur unaqf bs gur jvpxrq.

16:12 V jnf ng rnfr, ohg ur ungu oebxra zr nfhaqre: ur ungu nyfb gnxra
zr ol zl arpx, naq funxra zr gb cvrprf, naq frg zr hc sbe uvf znex.

16:13 Uvf nepuref pbzcnff zr ebhaq nobhg, ur pyrnirgu zl ervaf
nfhaqre, naq qbgu abg fcner; ur cbhergu bhg zl tnyy hcba gur tebhaq.

16:14 Ur oernxrgu zr jvgu oernpu hcba oernpu, ur ehaargu hcba zr yvxr
n tvnag.

16:15 V unir frjrq fnpxpybgu hcba zl fxva, naq qrsvyrq zl ubea va gur
qhfg.

16:16 Zl snpr vf sbhy jvgu jrrcvat, naq ba zl rlryvqf vf gur funqbj bs
qrngu; 16:17 Abg sbe nal vawhfgvpr va zvar unaqf: nyfb zl cenlre vf
cher.

16:18 B rnegu, pbire abg gubh zl oybbq, naq yrg zl pel unir ab cynpr.

16:19 Nyfb abj, orubyq, zl jvgarff vf va urnira, naq zl erpbeq vf ba
uvtu.

16:20 Zl sevraqf fpbea zr: ohg zvar rlr cbhergu bhg grnef hagb Tbq.

16:21 B gung bar zvtug cyrnq sbe n zna jvgu Tbq, nf n zna cyrnqrgu sbe
uvf arvtuobhe!  16:22 Jura n srj lrnef ner pbzr, gura V funyy tb gur
jnl jurapr V funyy abg erghea.

17:1 Zl oerngu vf pbeehcg, zl qnlf ner rkgvapg, gur tenirf ner ernql
sbe zr.

17:2 Ner gurer abg zbpxref jvgu zr? naq qbgu abg zvar rlr pbagvahr va
gurve cebibpngvba?  17:3 Ynl qbja abj, chg zr va n fhergl jvgu gurr;
jub vf ur gung jvyy fgevxr unaqf jvgu zr?  17:4 Sbe gubh unfg uvq
gurve urneg sebz haqrefgnaqvat: gurersber funyg gubh abg rknyg gurz.

17:5 Ur gung fcrnxrgu synggrel gb uvf sevraqf, rira gur rlrf bs uvf
puvyqera funyy snvy.

17:6 Ur ungu znqr zr nyfb n oljbeq bs gur crbcyr; naq nsbergvzr V jnf
nf n gnoerg.

17:7 Zvar rlr nyfb vf qvz ol ernfba bs fbeebj, naq nyy zl zrzoref ner
nf n funqbj.

17:8 Hcevtug zra funyy or nfgbavrq ng guvf, naq gur vaabprag funyy
fgve hc uvzfrys ntnvafg gur ulcbpevgr.

17:9 Gur evtugrbhf nyfb funyy ubyq ba uvf jnl, naq ur gung ungu pyrna
unaqf funyy or fgebatre naq fgebatre.

17:10 Ohg nf sbe lbh nyy, qb lr erghea, naq pbzr abj: sbe V pnaabg
svaq bar jvfr zna nzbat lbh.

17:11 Zl qnlf ner cnfg, zl checbfrf ner oebxra bss, rira gur gubhtugf
bs zl urneg.

17:12 Gurl punatr gur avtug vagb qnl: gur yvtug vf fubeg orpnhfr bs
qnexarff.

17:13 Vs V jnvg, gur tenir vf zvar ubhfr: V unir znqr zl orq va gur
qnexarff.

17:14 V unir fnvq gb pbeehcgvba, Gubh neg zl sngure: gb gur jbez, Gubh
neg zl zbgure, naq zl fvfgre.

17:15 Naq jurer vf abj zl ubcr? nf sbe zl ubcr, jub funyy frr vg?
17:16 Gurl funyy tb qbja gb gur onef bs gur cvg, jura bhe erfg
gbtrgure vf va gur qhfg.

18:1 Gura nafjrerq Ovyqnq gur Fuhuvgr, naq fnvq, 18:2 Ubj ybat jvyy vg
or rer lr znxr na raq bs jbeqf? znex, naq nsgrejneqf jr jvyy fcrnx.

18:3 Jurersber ner jr pbhagrq nf ornfgf, naq erchgrq ivyr va lbhe
fvtug?  18:4 Ur grnergu uvzfrys va uvf natre: funyy gur rnegu or
sbefnxra sbe gurr? naq funyy gur ebpx or erzbirq bhg bs uvf cynpr?
18:5 Lrn, gur yvtug bs gur jvpxrq funyy or chg bhg, naq gur fcnex bs
uvf sver funyy abg fuvar.

18:6 Gur yvtug funyy or qnex va uvf gnoreanpyr, naq uvf pnaqyr funyy
or chg bhg jvgu uvz.

18:7 Gur fgrcf bs uvf fgeratgu funyy or fgenvgrarq, naq uvf bja
pbhafry funyy pnfg uvz qbja.

18:8 Sbe ur vf pnfg vagb n arg ol uvf bja srrg, naq ur jnyxrgu hcba n
faner.

18:9 Gur tva funyy gnxr uvz ol gur urry, naq gur eboore funyy cerinvy
ntnvafg uvz.

18:10 Gur faner vf ynvq sbe uvz va gur tebhaq, naq n genc sbe uvz va
gur jnl.

18:11 Greebef funyy znxr uvz nsenvq ba rirel fvqr, naq funyy qevir uvz
gb uvf srrg.

18:12 Uvf fgeratgu funyy or uhatreovggra, naq qrfgehpgvba funyy or
ernql ng uvf fvqr.

18:13 Vg funyy qribhe gur fgeratgu bs uvf fxva: rira gur svefgobea bs
qrngu funyy qribhe uvf fgeratgu.

18:14 Uvf pbasvqrapr funyy or ebbgrq bhg bs uvf gnoreanpyr, naq vg
funyy oevat uvz gb gur xvat bs greebef.

18:15 Vg funyy qjryy va uvf gnoreanpyr, orpnhfr vg vf abar bs uvf:
oevzfgbar funyy or fpnggrerq hcba uvf unovgngvba.

18:16 Uvf ebbgf funyy or qevrq hc orarngu, naq nobir funyy uvf oenapu
or phg bss.

18:17 Uvf erzrzoenapr funyy crevfu sebz gur rnegu, naq ur funyy unir
ab anzr va gur fgerrg.

18:18 Ur funyy or qevira sebz yvtug vagb qnexarff, naq punfrq bhg bs
gur jbeyq.

18:19 Ur funyy arvgure unir fba abe arcurj nzbat uvf crbcyr, abe nal
erznvavat va uvf qjryyvatf.

18:20 Gurl gung pbzr nsgre uvz funyy or nfgbavrq ng uvf qnl, nf gurl
gung jrag orsber jrer nssevtugrq.

18:21 Fheryl fhpu ner gur qjryyvatf bs gur jvpxrq, naq guvf vf gur
cynpr bs uvz gung xabjrgu abg Tbq.

19:1 Gura Wbo nafjrerq naq fnvq, 19:2 Ubj ybat jvyy lr irk zl fbhy,
naq oernx zr va cvrprf jvgu jbeqf?  19:3 Gurfr gra gvzrf unir lr
ercebnpurq zr: lr ner abg nfunzrq gung lr znxr lbhefryirf fgenatr gb
zr.

19:4 Naq or vg vaqrrq gung V unir reerq, zvar reebe erznvargu jvgu
zlfrys.

19:5 Vs vaqrrq lr jvyy zntavsl lbhefryirf ntnvafg zr, naq cyrnq
ntnvafg zr zl ercebnpu: 19:6 Xabj abj gung Tbq ungu bireguebja zr, naq
ungu pbzcnffrq zr jvgu uvf arg.

19:7 Orubyq, V pel bhg bs jebat, ohg V nz abg urneq: V pel nybhq, ohg
gurer vf ab whqtzrag.

19:8 Ur ungu sraprq hc zl jnl gung V pnaabg cnff, naq ur ungu frg
qnexarff va zl cnguf.

19:9 Ur ungu fgevccrq zr bs zl tybel, naq gnxra gur pebja sebz zl
urnq.

19:10 Ur ungu qrfgeblrq zr ba rirel fvqr, naq V nz tbar: naq zvar ubcr
ungu ur erzbirq yvxr n gerr.

19:11 Ur ungu nyfb xvaqyrq uvf jengu ntnvafg zr, naq ur pbhagrgu zr
hagb uvz nf bar bs uvf rarzvrf.

19:12 Uvf gebbcf pbzr gbtrgure, naq envfr hc gurve jnl ntnvafg zr, naq
rapnzc ebhaq nobhg zl gnoreanpyr.

19:13 Ur ungu chg zl oerguera sne sebz zr, naq zvar npdhnvagnapr ner
irevyl rfgenatrq sebz zr.

19:14 Zl xvafsbyx unir snvyrq, naq zl snzvyvne sevraqf unir sbetbggra
zr.

19:15 Gurl gung qjryy va zvar ubhfr, naq zl znvqf, pbhag zr sbe n
fgenatre: V nz na nyvra va gurve fvtug.

19:16 V pnyyrq zl freinag, naq ur tnir zr ab nafjre; V vagerngrq uvz
jvgu zl zbhgu.

19:17 Zl oerngu vf fgenatr gb zl jvsr, gubhtu V vagerngrq sbe gur
puvyqera'f fnxr bs zvar bja obql.

19:18 Lrn, lbhat puvyqera qrfcvfrq zr; V nebfr, naq gurl fcnxr ntnvafg
zr.

19:19 Nyy zl vajneq sevraqf noubeerq zr: naq gurl jubz V ybirq ner
ghearq ntnvafg zr.

19:20 Zl obar pyrnirgu gb zl fxva naq gb zl syrfu, naq V nz rfpncrq
jvgu gur fxva bs zl grrgu.

19:21 Unir cvgl hcba zr, unir cvgl hcba zr, B lr zl sevraqf; sbe gur
unaq bs Tbq ungu gbhpurq zr.

19:22 Jul qb lr crefrphgr zr nf Tbq, naq ner abg fngvfsvrq jvgu zl
syrfu?  19:23 Bu gung zl jbeqf jrer abj jevggra! bu gung gurl jrer
cevagrq va n obbx!  19:24 Gung gurl jrer tenira jvgu na veba cra naq
yrnq va gur ebpx sbe rire!  19:25 Sbe V xabj gung zl erqrrzre yvirgu,
naq gung ur funyy fgnaq ng gur ynggre qnl hcba gur rnegu: 19:26 Naq
gubhtu nsgre zl fxva jbezf qrfgebl guvf obql, lrg va zl syrfu funyy V
frr Tbq: 19:27 Jubz V funyy frr sbe zlfrys, naq zvar rlrf funyy
orubyq, naq abg nabgure; gubhtu zl ervaf or pbafhzrq jvguva zr.

19:28 Ohg lr fubhyq fnl, Jul crefrphgr jr uvz, frrvat gur ebbg bs gur
znggre vf sbhaq va zr?  19:29 Or lr nsenvq bs gur fjbeq: sbe jengu
oevatrgu gur chavfuzragf bs gur fjbeq, gung lr znl xabj gurer vf n
whqtzrag.

20:1 Gura nafjrerq Mbcune gur Annznguvgr, naq fnvq, 20:2 Gurersber qb
zl gubhtugf pnhfr zr gb nafjre, naq sbe guvf V znxr unfgr.

20:3 V unir urneq gur purpx bs zl ercebnpu, naq gur fcvevg bs zl
haqrefgnaqvat pnhfrgu zr gb nafjre.

20:4 Xabjrfg gubh abg guvf bs byq, fvapr zna jnf cynprq hcba rnegu,
20:5 Gung gur gevhzcuvat bs gur jvpxrq vf fubeg, naq gur wbl bs gur
ulcbpevgr ohg sbe n zbzrag?  20:6 Gubhtu uvf rkpryyrapl zbhag hc gb
gur urniraf, naq uvf urnq ernpu hagb gur pybhqf; 20:7 Lrg ur funyy
crevfu sbe rire yvxr uvf bja qhat: gurl juvpu unir frra uvz funyy fnl,
Jurer vf ur?  20:8 Ur funyy syl njnl nf n qernz, naq funyy abg or
sbhaq: lrn, ur funyy or punfrq njnl nf n ivfvba bs gur avtug.

20:9 Gur rlr nyfb juvpu fnj uvz funyy frr uvz ab zber; arvgure funyy
uvf cynpr nal zber orubyq uvz.

20:10 Uvf puvyqera funyy frrx gb cyrnfr gur cbbe, naq uvf unaqf funyy
erfgber gurve tbbqf.

20:11 Uvf obarf ner shyy bs gur fva bs uvf lbhgu, juvpu funyy yvr qbja
jvgu uvz va gur qhfg.

20:12 Gubhtu jvpxrqarff or fjrrg va uvf zbhgu, gubhtu ur uvqr vg haqre
uvf gbathr; 20:13 Gubhtu ur fcner vg, naq sbefnxr vg abg; ohg xrrc vg
fgvyy jvguva uvf zbhgu: 20:14 Lrg uvf zrng va uvf objryf vf ghearq, vg
vf gur tnyy bs nfcf jvguva uvz.

20:15 Ur ungu fjnyybjrq qbja evpurf, naq ur funyy ibzvg gurz hc ntnva:
Tbq funyy pnfg gurz bhg bs uvf oryyl.

20:16 Ur funyy fhpx gur cbvfba bs nfcf: gur ivcre'f gbathr funyy fynl
uvz.

20:17 Ur funyy abg frr gur eviref, gur sybbqf, gur oebbxf bs ubarl naq
ohggre.

20:18 Gung juvpu ur ynobherq sbe funyy ur erfgber, naq funyy abg
fjnyybj vg qbja: nppbeqvat gb uvf fhofgnapr funyy gur erfgvghgvba or,
naq ur funyy abg erwbvpr gurerva.

20:19 Orpnhfr ur ungu bccerffrq naq ungu sbefnxra gur cbbe; orpnhfr ur
ungu ivbyragyl gnxra njnl na ubhfr juvpu ur ohvyqrq abg; 20:20 Fheryl
ur funyy abg srry dhvrgarff va uvf oryyl, ur funyy abg fnir bs gung
juvpu ur qrfverq.

20:21 Gurer funyy abar bs uvf zrng or yrsg; gurersber funyy ab zna
ybbx sbe uvf tbbqf.

20:22 Va gur shyarff bs uvf fhssvpvrapl ur funyy or va fgenvgf: rirel
unaq bs gur jvpxrq funyy pbzr hcba uvz.

20:23 Jura ur vf nobhg gb svyy uvf oryyl, Tbq funyy pnfg gur shel bs
uvf jengu hcba uvz, naq funyy enva vg hcba uvz juvyr ur vf rngvat.

20:24 Ur funyy syrr sebz gur veba jrncba, naq gur obj bs fgrry funyy
fgevxr uvz guebhtu.

20:25 Vg vf qenja, naq pbzrgu bhg bs gur obql; lrn, gur tyvggrevat
fjbeq pbzrgu bhg bs uvf tnyy: greebef ner hcba uvz.

20:26 Nyy qnexarff funyy or uvq va uvf frperg cynprf: n sver abg oybja
funyy pbafhzr uvz; vg funyy tb vyy jvgu uvz gung vf yrsg va uvf
gnoreanpyr.

20:27 Gur urnira funyy erirny uvf vavdhvgl; naq gur rnegu funyy evfr
hc ntnvafg uvz.

20:28 Gur vapernfr bs uvf ubhfr funyy qrcneg, naq uvf tbbqf funyy sybj
njnl va gur qnl bs uvf jengu.

20:29 Guvf vf gur cbegvba bs n jvpxrq zna sebz Tbq, naq gur urevgntr
nccbvagrq hagb uvz ol Tbq.

21:1 Ohg Wbo nafjrerq naq fnvq, 21:2 Urne qvyvtragyl zl fcrrpu, naq
yrg guvf or lbhe pbafbyngvbaf.

21:3 Fhssre zr gung V znl fcrnx; naq nsgre gung V unir fcbxra, zbpx
ba.

21:4 Nf sbe zr, vf zl pbzcynvag gb zna? naq vs vg jrer fb, jul fubhyq
abg zl fcvevg or gebhoyrq?  21:5 Znex zr, naq or nfgbavfurq, naq ynl
lbhe unaq hcba lbhe zbhgu.

21:6 Rira jura V erzrzore V nz nsenvq, naq gerzoyvat gnxrgu ubyq ba zl
syrfu.

21:7 Jurersber qb gur jvpxrq yvir, orpbzr byq, lrn, ner zvtugl va
cbjre?  21:8 Gurve frrq vf rfgnoyvfurq va gurve fvtug jvgu gurz, naq
gurve bssfcevat orsber gurve rlrf.

21:9 Gurve ubhfrf ner fnsr sebz srne, arvgure vf gur ebq bs Tbq hcba
gurz.

21:10 Gurve ohyy traqrergu, naq snvyrgu abg; gurve pbj pnyirgu, naq
pnfgrgu abg ure pnys.

21:11 Gurl fraq sbegu gurve yvggyr barf yvxr n sybpx, naq gurve
puvyqera qnapr.

21:12 Gurl gnxr gur gvzoery naq unec, naq erwbvpr ng gur fbhaq bs gur
betna.

21:13 Gurl fcraq gurve qnlf va jrnygu, naq va n zbzrag tb qbja gb gur
tenir.

21:14 Gurersber gurl fnl hagb Tbq, Qrcneg sebz hf; sbe jr qrfver abg
gur xabjyrqtr bs gul jnlf.

21:15 Jung vf gur Nyzvtugl, gung jr fubhyq freir uvz? naq jung cebsvg
fubhyq jr unir, vs jr cenl hagb uvz?  21:16 Yb, gurve tbbq vf abg va
gurve unaq: gur pbhafry bs gur jvpxrq vf sne sebz zr.

21:17 Ubj bsg vf gur pnaqyr bs gur jvpxrq chg bhg! naq ubj bsg pbzrgu
gurve qrfgehpgvba hcba gurz! Tbq qvfgevohgrgu fbeebjf va uvf natre.

21:18 Gurl ner nf fghooyr orsber gur jvaq, naq nf punss gung gur fgbez
pneevrgu njnl.

21:19 Tbq ynlrgu hc uvf vavdhvgl sbe uvf puvyqera: ur erjneqrgu uvz,
naq ur funyy xabj vg.

21:20 Uvf rlrf funyy frr uvf qrfgehpgvba, naq ur funyy qevax bs gur
jengu bs gur Nyzvtugl.

21:21 Sbe jung cyrnfher ungu ur va uvf ubhfr nsgre uvz, jura gur
ahzore bs uvf zbaguf vf phg bss va gur zvqfg?  21:22 Funyy nal grnpu
Tbq xabjyrqtr? frrvat ur whqtrgu gubfr gung ner uvtu.

21:23 Bar qvrgu va uvf shyy fgeratgu, orvat jubyyl ng rnfr naq dhvrg.

21:24 Uvf oernfgf ner shyy bs zvyx, naq uvf obarf ner zbvfgrarq jvgu
zneebj.

21:25 Naq nabgure qvrgu va gur ovggrearff bs uvf fbhy, naq arire
rngrgu jvgu cyrnfher.

21:26 Gurl funyy yvr qbja nyvxr va gur qhfg, naq gur jbezf funyy pbire
gurz.

21:27 Orubyq, V xabj lbhe gubhtugf, naq gur qrivprf juvpu lr
jebatshyyl vzntvar ntnvafg zr.

21:28 Sbe lr fnl, Jurer vf gur ubhfr bs gur cevapr? naq jurer ner gur
qjryyvat cynprf bs gur jvpxrq?  21:29 Unir lr abg nfxrq gurz gung tb
ol gur jnl? naq qb lr abg xabj gurve gbxraf, 21:30 Gung gur jvpxrq vf
erfreirq gb gur qnl bs qrfgehpgvba? gurl funyy or oebhtug sbegu gb gur
qnl bs jengu.

21:31 Jub funyy qrpyner uvf jnl gb uvf snpr? naq jub funyy ercnl uvz
jung ur ungu qbar?  21:32 Lrg funyy ur or oebhtug gb gur tenir, naq
funyy erznva va gur gbzo.

21:33 Gur pybqf bs gur inyyrl funyy or fjrrg hagb uvz, naq rirel zna
funyy qenj nsgre uvz, nf gurer ner vaahzrenoyr orsber uvz.

21:34 Ubj gura pbzsbeg lr zr va inva, frrvat va lbhe nafjref gurer
erznvargu snyfrubbq?  22:1 Gura Ryvcunm gur Grznavgr nafjrerq naq
fnvq, 22:2 Pna n zna or cebsvgnoyr hagb Tbq, nf ur gung vf jvfr znl or
cebsvgnoyr hagb uvzfrys?  22:3 Vf vg nal cyrnfher gb gur Nyzvtugl,
gung gubh neg evtugrbhf? be vf vg tnva gb uvz, gung gubh znxrfg gul
jnlf cresrpg?  22:4 Jvyy ur ercebir gurr sbe srne bs gurr? jvyy ur
ragre jvgu gurr vagb whqtzrag?  22:5 Vf abg gul jvpxrqarff terng? naq
guvar vavdhvgvrf vasvavgr?  22:6 Sbe gubh unfg gnxra n cyrqtr sebz gul
oebgure sbe abhtug, naq fgevccrq gur anxrq bs gurve pybguvat.

22:7 Gubh unfg abg tvira jngre gb gur jrnel gb qevax, naq gubh unfg
jvguubyqra oernq sebz gur uhatel.

22:8 Ohg nf sbe gur zvtugl zna, ur unq gur rnegu; naq gur ubabhenoyr
zna qjryg va vg.

22:9 Gubh unfg frag jvqbjf njnl rzcgl, naq gur nezf bs gur sngureyrff
unir orra oebxra.

22:10 Gurersber fanerf ner ebhaq nobhg gurr, naq fhqqra srne gebhoyrgu
gurr; 22:11 Be qnexarff, gung gubh pnafg abg frr; naq nohaqnapr bs
jngref pbire gurr.

22:12 Vf abg Tbq va gur urvtug bs urnira? naq orubyq gur urvtug bs gur
fgnef, ubj uvtu gurl ner!  22:13 Naq gubh fnlrfg, Ubj qbgu Tbq xabj?
pna ur whqtr guebhtu gur qnex pybhq?  22:14 Guvpx pybhqf ner n
pbirevat gb uvz, gung ur frrgu abg; naq ur jnyxrgu va gur pvephvg bs
urnira.

22:15 Unfg gubh znexrq gur byq jnl juvpu jvpxrq zra unir gebqqra?
22:16 Juvpu jrer phg qbja bhg bs gvzr, jubfr sbhaqngvba jnf biresybja
jvgu n sybbq: 22:17 Juvpu fnvq hagb Tbq, Qrcneg sebz hf: naq jung pna
gur Nyzvtugl qb sbe gurz?  22:18 Lrg ur svyyrq gurve ubhfrf jvgu tbbq
guvatf: ohg gur pbhafry bs gur jvpxrq vf sne sebz zr.

22:19 Gur evtugrbhf frr vg, naq ner tynq: naq gur vaabprag ynhtu gurz
gb fpbea.

22:20 Jurernf bhe fhofgnapr vf abg phg qbja, ohg gur erzanag bs gurz
gur sver pbafhzrgu.

22:21 Npdhnvag abj gulfrys jvgu uvz, naq or ng crnpr: gurerol tbbq
funyy pbzr hagb gurr.

22:22 Erprvir, V cenl gurr, gur ynj sebz uvf zbhgu, naq ynl hc uvf
jbeqf va guvar urneg.

22:23 Vs gubh erghea gb gur Nyzvtugl, gubh funyg or ohvyg hc, gubh
funyg chg njnl vavdhvgl sne sebz gul gnoreanpyrf.

22:24 Gura funyg gubh ynl hc tbyq nf qhfg, naq gur tbyq bs Bcuve nf
gur fgbarf bs gur oebbxf.

22:25 Lrn, gur Nyzvtugl funyy or gul qrsrapr, naq gubh funyg unir
cyragl bs fvyire.

22:26 Sbe gura funyg gubh unir gul qryvtug va gur Nyzvtugl, naq funyg
yvsg hc gul snpr hagb Tbq.

22:27 Gubh funyg znxr gul cenlre hagb uvz, naq ur funyy urne gurr, naq
gubh funyg cnl gul ibjf.

22:28 Gubh funyg nyfb qrperr n guvat, naq vg funyy or rfgnoyvfurq hagb
gurr: naq gur yvtug funyy fuvar hcba gul jnlf.

22:29 Jura zra ner pnfg qbja, gura gubh funyg fnl, Gurer vf yvsgvat
hc; naq ur funyy fnir gur uhzoyr crefba.

22:30 Ur funyy qryvire gur vfynaq bs gur vaabprag: naq vg vf qryvirerq
ol gur cherarff bs guvar unaqf.

23:1 Gura Wbo nafjrerq naq fnvq, 23:2 Rira gb qnl vf zl pbzcynvag
ovggre: zl fgebxr vf urnivre guna zl tebnavat.

23:3 Bu gung V xarj jurer V zvtug svaq uvz! gung V zvtug pbzr rira gb
uvf frng!  23:4 V jbhyq beqre zl pnhfr orsber uvz, naq svyy zl zbhgu
jvgu nethzragf.

23:5 V jbhyq xabj gur jbeqf juvpu ur jbhyq nafjre zr, naq haqrefgnaq
jung ur jbhyq fnl hagb zr.

23:6 Jvyy ur cyrnq ntnvafg zr jvgu uvf terng cbjre? Ab; ohg ur jbhyq
chg fgeratgu va zr.

23:7 Gurer gur evtugrbhf zvtug qvfchgr jvgu uvz; fb fubhyq V or
qryvirerq sbe rire sebz zl whqtr.

23:8 Orubyq, V tb sbejneq, ohg ur vf abg gurer; naq onpxjneq, ohg V
pnaabg creprvir uvz: 23:9 Ba gur yrsg unaq, jurer ur qbgu jbex, ohg V
pnaabg orubyq uvz: ur uvqrgu uvzfrys ba gur evtug unaq, gung V pnaabg
frr uvz: 23:10 Ohg ur xabjrgu gur jnl gung V gnxr: jura ur ungu gevrq
zr, V funyy pbzr sbegu nf tbyq.

23:11 Zl sbbg ungu uryq uvf fgrcf, uvf jnl unir V xrcg, naq abg
qrpyvarq.

23:12 Arvgure unir V tbar onpx sebz gur pbzznaqzrag bs uvf yvcf; V
unir rfgrrzrq gur jbeqf bs uvf zbhgu zber guna zl arprffnel sbbq.

23:13 Ohg ur vf va bar zvaq, naq jub pna ghea uvz? naq jung uvf fbhy
qrfvergu, rira gung ur qbrgu.

23:14 Sbe ur cresbezrgu gur guvat gung vf nccbvagrq sbe zr: naq znal
fhpu guvatf ner jvgu uvz.

23:15 Gurersber nz V gebhoyrq ng uvf cerfrapr: jura V pbafvqre, V nz
nsenvq bs uvz.

23:16 Sbe Tbq znxrgu zl urneg fbsg, naq gur Nyzvtugl gebhoyrgu zr:
23:17 Orpnhfr V jnf abg phg bss orsber gur qnexarff, arvgure ungu ur
pbirerq gur qnexarff sebz zl snpr.

24:1 Jul, frrvat gvzrf ner abg uvqqra sebz gur Nyzvtugl, qb gurl gung
xabj uvz abg frr uvf qnlf?  24:2 Fbzr erzbir gur ynaqznexf; gurl
ivbyragyl gnxr njnl sybpxf, naq srrq gurerbs.

24:3 Gurl qevir njnl gur nff bs gur sngureyrff, gurl gnxr gur jvqbj'f
bk sbe n cyrqtr.

24:4 Gurl ghea gur arrql bhg bs gur jnl: gur cbbe bs gur rnegu uvqr
gurzfryirf gbtrgure.

24:5 Orubyq, nf jvyq nffrf va gur qrfreg, tb gurl sbegu gb gurve jbex;
evfvat orgvzrf sbe n cerl: gur jvyqrearff lvryqrgu sbbq sbe gurz naq
sbe gurve puvyqera.

24:6 Gurl ernc rirel bar uvf pbea va gur svryq: naq gurl tngure gur
ivagntr bs gur jvpxrq.

24:7 Gurl pnhfr gur anxrq gb ybqtr jvgubhg pybguvat, gung gurl unir ab
pbirevat va gur pbyq.

24:8 Gurl ner jrg jvgu gur fubjref bs gur zbhagnvaf, naq rzoenpr gur
ebpx sbe jnag bs n furygre.

24:9 Gurl cyhpx gur sngureyrff sebz gur oernfg, naq gnxr n cyrqtr bs
gur cbbe.

24:10 Gurl pnhfr uvz gb tb anxrq jvgubhg pybguvat, naq gurl gnxr njnl
gur furns sebz gur uhatel; 24:11 Juvpu znxr bvy jvguva gurve jnyyf,
naq gernq gurve jvarcerffrf, naq fhssre guvefg.

24:12 Zra tebna sebz bhg bs gur pvgl, naq gur fbhy bs gur jbhaqrq
pevrgu bhg: lrg Tbq ynlrgu abg sbyyl gb gurz.

24:13 Gurl ner bs gubfr gung erory ntnvafg gur yvtug; gurl xabj abg
gur jnlf gurerbs, abe novqr va gur cnguf gurerbs.

24:14 Gur zheqrere evfvat jvgu gur yvtug xvyyrgu gur cbbe naq arrql,
naq va gur avtug vf nf n guvrs.

24:15 Gur rlr nyfb bs gur nqhygrere jnvgrgu sbe gur gjvyvtug, fnlvat,
Ab rlr funyy frr zr: naq qvfthvfrgu uvf snpr.

24:16 Va gur qnex gurl qvt guebhtu ubhfrf, juvpu gurl unq znexrq sbe
gurzfryirf va gur qnlgvzr: gurl xabj abg gur yvtug.

24:17 Sbe gur zbeavat vf gb gurz rira nf gur funqbj bs qrngu: vs bar
xabj gurz, gurl ner va gur greebef bs gur funqbj bs qrngu.

24:18 Ur vf fjvsg nf gur jngref; gurve cbegvba vf phefrq va gur rnegu:
ur orubyqrgu abg gur jnl bs gur ivarlneqf.

24:19 Qebhtug naq urng pbafhzr gur fabj jngref: fb qbgu gur tenir
gubfr juvpu unir fvaarq.

24:20 Gur jbzo funyy sbetrg uvz; gur jbez funyy srrq fjrrgyl ba uvz;
ur funyy or ab zber erzrzorerq; naq jvpxrqarff funyy or oebxra nf n
gerr.

24:21 Ur rivy ragerngrgu gur oneera gung ornergu abg: naq qbrgu abg
tbbq gb gur jvqbj.

24:22 Ur qenjrgu nyfb gur zvtugl jvgu uvf cbjre: ur evfrgu hc, naq ab
zna vf fher bs yvsr.

24:23 Gubhtu vg or tvira uvz gb or va fnsrgl, jurerba ur erfgrgu; lrg
uvf rlrf ner hcba gurve jnlf.

24:24 Gurl ner rknygrq sbe n yvggyr juvyr, ohg ner tbar naq oebhtug
ybj; gurl ner gnxra bhg bs gur jnl nf nyy bgure, naq phg bss nf gur
gbcf bs gur rnef bs pbea.

24:25 Naq vs vg or abg fb abj, jub jvyy znxr zr n yvne, naq znxr zl
fcrrpu abguvat jbegu?  25:1 Gura nafjrerq Ovyqnq gur Fuhuvgr, naq
fnvq, 25:2 Qbzvavba naq srne ner jvgu uvz, ur znxrgu crnpr va uvf uvtu
cynprf.

25:3 Vf gurer nal ahzore bs uvf nezvrf? naq hcba jubz qbgu abg uvf
yvtug nevfr?  25:4 Ubj gura pna zna or whfgvsvrq jvgu Tbq? be ubj pna
ur or pyrna gung vf obea bs n jbzna?  25:5 Orubyq rira gb gur zbba,
naq vg fuvargu abg; lrn, gur fgnef ner abg cher va uvf fvtug.

25:6 Ubj zhpu yrff zna, gung vf n jbez? naq gur fba bs zna, juvpu vf n
jbez?  26:1 Ohg Wbo nafjrerq naq fnvq, 26:2 Ubj unfg gubh urycrq uvz
gung vf jvgubhg cbjre? ubj fnirfg gubh gur nez gung ungu ab fgeratgu?
26:3 Ubj unfg gubh pbhafryyrq uvz gung ungu ab jvfqbz? naq ubj unfg
gubh cyragvshyyl qrpynerq gur guvat nf vg vf?  26:4 Gb jubz unfg gubh
hggrerq jbeqf? naq jubfr fcvevg pnzr sebz gurr?  26:5 Qrnq guvatf ner
sbezrq sebz haqre gur jngref, naq gur vaunovgnagf gurerbs.

26:6 Uryy vf anxrq orsber uvz, naq qrfgehpgvba ungu ab pbirevat.

26:7 Ur fgergpurgu bhg gur abegu bire gur rzcgl cynpr, naq unatrgu gur
rnegu hcba abguvat.

26:8 Ur ovaqrgu hc gur jngref va uvf guvpx pybhqf; naq gur pybhq vf
abg erag haqre gurz.

26:9 Ur ubyqrgu onpx gur snpr bs uvf guebar, naq fcernqrgu uvf pybhq
hcba vg.

26:10 Ur ungu pbzcnffrq gur jngref jvgu obhaqf, hagvy gur qnl naq
avtug pbzr gb na raq.

26:11 Gur cvyynef bs urnira gerzoyr naq ner nfgbavfurq ng uvf ercebbs.

26:12 Ur qvivqrgu gur frn jvgu uvf cbjre, naq ol uvf haqrefgnaqvat ur
fzvgrgu guebhtu gur cebhq.

26:13 Ol uvf fcvevg ur ungu tneavfurq gur urniraf; uvf unaq ungu
sbezrq gur pebbxrq frecrag.

26:14 Yb, gurfr ner cnegf bs uvf jnlf: ohg ubj yvggyr n cbegvba vf
urneq bs uvz? ohg gur guhaqre bs uvf cbjre jub pna haqrefgnaq?  27:1
Zberbire Wbo pbagvahrq uvf cnenoyr, naq fnvq, 27:2 Nf Tbq yvirgu, jub
ungu gnxra njnl zl whqtzrag; naq gur Nyzvtugl, jub ungu irkrq zl fbhy;
27:3 Nyy gur juvyr zl oerngu vf va zr, naq gur fcvevg bs Tbq vf va zl
abfgevyf; 27:4 Zl yvcf funyy abg fcrnx jvpxrqarff, abe zl gbathr hggre
qrprvg.

27:5 Tbq sbeovq gung V fubhyq whfgvsl lbh: gvyy V qvr V jvyy abg
erzbir zvar vagrtevgl sebz zr.

27:6 Zl evtugrbhfarff V ubyq snfg, naq jvyy abg yrg vg tb: zl urneg
funyy abg ercebnpu zr fb ybat nf V yvir.

27:7 Yrg zvar rarzl or nf gur jvpxrq, naq ur gung evfrgu hc ntnvafg zr
nf gur haevtugrbhf.

27:8 Sbe jung vf gur ubcr bs gur ulcbpevgr, gubhtu ur ungu tnvarq,
jura Tbq gnxrgu njnl uvf fbhy?  27:9 Jvyy Tbq urne uvf pel jura
gebhoyr pbzrgu hcba uvz?  27:10 Jvyy ur qryvtug uvzfrys va gur
Nyzvtugl? jvyy ur nyjnlf pnyy hcba Tbq?  27:11 V jvyy grnpu lbh ol gur
unaq bs Tbq: gung juvpu vf jvgu gur Nyzvtugl jvyy V abg pbaprny.

27:12 Orubyq, nyy lr lbhefryirf unir frra vg; jul gura ner lr guhf
nygbtrgure inva?  27:13 Guvf vf gur cbegvba bs n jvpxrq zna jvgu Tbq,
naq gur urevgntr bs bccerffbef, juvpu gurl funyy erprvir bs gur
Nyzvtugl.

27:14 Vs uvf puvyqera or zhygvcyvrq, vg vf sbe gur fjbeq: naq uvf
bssfcevat funyy abg or fngvfsvrq jvgu oernq.

27:15 Gubfr gung erznva bs uvz funyy or ohevrq va qrngu: naq uvf
jvqbjf funyy abg jrrc.

27:16 Gubhtu ur urnc hc fvyire nf gur qhfg, naq cercner envzrag nf gur
pynl; 27:17 Ur znl cercner vg, ohg gur whfg funyy chg vg ba, naq gur
vaabprag funyy qvivqr gur fvyire.

27:18 Ur ohvyqrgu uvf ubhfr nf n zbgu, naq nf n obbgu gung gur xrrcre
znxrgu.

27:19 Gur evpu zna funyy yvr qbja, ohg ur funyy abg or tngurerq: ur
bcrargu uvf rlrf, naq ur vf abg.

27:20 Greebef gnxr ubyq ba uvz nf jngref, n grzcrfg fgrnyrgu uvz njnl
va gur avtug.

27:21 Gur rnfg jvaq pneevrgu uvz njnl, naq ur qrcnegrgu: naq nf n
fgbez uheyrgu uvz bhg bs uvf cynpr.

27:22 Sbe Tbq funyy pnfg hcba uvz, naq abg fcner: ur jbhyq snva syrr
bhg bs uvf unaq.

27:23 Zra funyy pync gurve unaqf ng uvz, naq funyy uvff uvz bhg bs uvf
cynpr.

28:1 Fheryl gurer vf n irva sbe gur fvyire, naq n cynpr sbe tbyq jurer
gurl svar vg.

28:2 Veba vf gnxra bhg bs gur rnegu, naq oenff vf zbygra bhg bs gur
fgbar.

28:3 Ur frggrgu na raq gb qnexarff, naq frnepurgu bhg nyy cresrpgvba:
gur fgbarf bs qnexarff, naq gur funqbj bs qrngu.

28:4 Gur sybbq oernxrgu bhg sebz gur vaunovgnag; rira gur jngref
sbetbggra bs gur sbbg: gurl ner qevrq hc, gurl ner tbar njnl sebz zra.

28:5 Nf sbe gur rnegu, bhg bs vg pbzrgu oernq: naq haqre vg vf ghearq
hc nf vg jrer sver.

28:6 Gur fgbarf bs vg ner gur cynpr bs fnccuverf: naq vg ungu qhfg bs
tbyq.

28:7 Gurer vf n cngu juvpu ab sbjy xabjrgu, naq juvpu gur ihygher'f
rlr ungu abg frra: 28:8 Gur yvba'f jurycf unir abg gebqqra vg, abe gur
svrepr yvba cnffrq ol vg.

28:9 Ur chggrgu sbegu uvf unaq hcba gur ebpx; ur biregheargu gur
zbhagnvaf ol gur ebbgf.

28:10 Ur phggrgu bhg eviref nzbat gur ebpxf; naq uvf rlr frrgu rirel
cerpvbhf guvat.

28:11 Ur ovaqrgu gur sybbqf sebz biresybjvat; naq gur guvat gung vf
uvq oevatrgu ur sbegu gb yvtug.

28:12 Ohg jurer funyy jvfqbz or sbhaq? naq jurer vf gur cynpr bs
haqrefgnaqvat?  28:13 Zna xabjrgu abg gur cevpr gurerbs; arvgure vf vg
sbhaq va gur ynaq bs gur yvivat.

28:14 Gur qrcgu fnvgu, Vg vf abg va zr: naq gur frn fnvgu, Vg vf abg
jvgu zr.

28:15 Vg pnaabg or tbggra sbe tbyq, arvgure funyy fvyire or jrvturq
sbe gur cevpr gurerbs.

28:16 Vg pnaabg or inyhrq jvgu gur tbyq bs Bcuve, jvgu gur cerpvbhf
balk, be gur fnccuver.

28:17 Gur tbyq naq gur pelfgny pnaabg rdhny vg: naq gur rkpunatr bs vg
funyy abg or sbe wrjryf bs svar tbyq.

28:18 Ab zragvba funyy or znqr bs pbeny, be bs crneyf: sbe gur cevpr
bs jvfqbz vf nobir ehovrf.

28:19 Gur gbcnm bs Rguvbcvn funyy abg rdhny vg, arvgure funyy vg or
inyhrq jvgu cher tbyq.

28:20 Jurapr gura pbzrgu jvfqbz? naq jurer vf gur cynpr bs
haqrefgnaqvat?  28:21 Frrvat vg vf uvq sebz gur rlrf bs nyy yvivat,
naq xrcg pybfr sebz gur sbjyf bs gur nve.

28:22 Qrfgehpgvba naq qrngu fnl, Jr unir urneq gur snzr gurerbs jvgu
bhe rnef.

28:23 Tbq haqrefgnaqrgu gur jnl gurerbs, naq ur xabjrgu gur cynpr
gurerbs.

28:24 Sbe ur ybbxrgu gb gur raqf bs gur rnegu, naq frrgu haqre gur
jubyr urnira; 28:25 Gb znxr gur jrvtug sbe gur jvaqf; naq ur jrvturgu
gur jngref ol zrnfher.

28:26 Jura ur znqr n qrperr sbe gur enva, naq n jnl sbe gur yvtugavat
bs gur guhaqre: 28:27 Gura qvq ur frr vg, naq qrpyner vg; ur cercnerq
vg, lrn, naq frnepurq vg bhg.

28:28 Naq hagb zna ur fnvq, Orubyq, gur srne bs gur YBEQ, gung vf
jvfqbz; naq gb qrcneg sebz rivy vf haqrefgnaqvat.

29:1 Zberbire Wbo pbagvahrq uvf cnenoyr, naq fnvq, 29:2 Bu gung V jrer
nf va zbaguf cnfg, nf va gur qnlf jura Tbq cerfreirq zr; 29:3 Jura uvf
pnaqyr fuvarq hcba zl urnq, naq jura ol uvf yvtug V jnyxrq guebhtu
qnexarff; 29:4 Nf V jnf va gur qnlf bs zl lbhgu, jura gur frperg bs
Tbq jnf hcba zl gnoreanpyr; 29:5 Jura gur Nyzvtugl jnf lrg jvgu zr,
jura zl puvyqera jrer nobhg zr; 29:6 Jura V jnfurq zl fgrcf jvgu
ohggre, naq gur ebpx cbherq zr bhg eviref bs bvy; 29:7 Jura V jrag bhg
gb gur tngr guebhtu gur pvgl, jura V cercnerq zl frng va gur fgerrg!
29:8 Gur lbhat zra fnj zr, naq uvq gurzfryirf: naq gur ntrq nebfr, naq
fgbbq hc.

29:9 Gur cevaprf ersenvarq gnyxvat, naq ynvq gurve unaq ba gurve
zbhgu.

29:10 Gur aboyrf uryq gurve crnpr, naq gurve gbathr pyrnirq gb gur
ebbs bs gurve zbhgu.

29:11 Jura gur rne urneq zr, gura vg oyrffrq zr; naq jura gur rlr fnj
zr, vg tnir jvgarff gb zr: 29:12 Orpnhfr V qryvirerq gur cbbe gung
pevrq, naq gur sngureyrff, naq uvz gung unq abar gb uryc uvz.

29:13 Gur oyrffvat bs uvz gung jnf ernql gb crevfu pnzr hcba zr: naq V
pnhfrq gur jvqbj'f urneg gb fvat sbe wbl.

29:14 V chg ba evtugrbhfarff, naq vg pybgurq zr: zl whqtzrag jnf nf n
ebor naq n qvnqrz.

29:15 V jnf rlrf gb gur oyvaq, naq srrg jnf V gb gur ynzr.

29:16 V jnf n sngure gb gur cbbe: naq gur pnhfr juvpu V xarj abg V
frnepurq bhg.

29:17 Naq V oenxr gur wnjf bs gur jvpxrq, naq cyhpxrq gur fcbvy bhg bs
uvf grrgu.

29:18 Gura V fnvq, V funyy qvr va zl arfg, naq V funyy zhygvcyl zl
qnlf nf gur fnaq.

29:19 Zl ebbg jnf fcernq bhg ol gur jngref, naq gur qrj ynl nyy avtug
hcba zl oenapu.

29:20 Zl tybel jnf serfu va zr, naq zl obj jnf erarjrq va zl unaq.

29:21 Hagb zr zra tnir rne, naq jnvgrq, naq xrcg fvyrapr ng zl
pbhafry.

29:22 Nsgre zl jbeqf gurl fcnxr abg ntnva; naq zl fcrrpu qebccrq hcba
gurz.

29:23 Naq gurl jnvgrq sbe zr nf sbe gur enva; naq gurl bcrarq gurve
zbhgu jvqr nf sbe gur ynggre enva.

29:24 Vs V ynhturq ba gurz, gurl oryvrirq vg abg; naq gur yvtug bs zl
pbhagranapr gurl pnfg abg qbja.

29:25 V pubfr bhg gurve jnl, naq fng puvrs, naq qjryg nf n xvat va gur
nezl, nf bar gung pbzsbegrgu gur zbhearef.

30:1 Ohg abj gurl gung ner lbhatre guna V unir zr va qrevfvba, jubfr
snguref V jbhyq unir qvfqnvarq gb unir frg jvgu gur qbtf bs zl sybpx.

30:2 Lrn, jurergb zvtug gur fgeratgu bs gurve unaqf cebsvg zr, va jubz
byq ntr jnf crevfurq?  30:3 Sbe jnag naq snzvar gurl jrer fbyvgnel;
syrrvat vagb gur jvyqrearff va sbezre gvzr qrfbyngr naq jnfgr.

30:4 Jub phg hc znyybjf ol gur ohfurf, naq whavcre ebbgf sbe gurve
zrng.

30:5 Gurl jrer qevira sbegu sebz nzbat zra, (gurl pevrq nsgre gurz nf
nsgre n guvrs;) 30:6 Gb qjryy va gur pyvssf bs gur inyyrlf, va pnirf
bs gur rnegu, naq va gur ebpxf.

30:7 Nzbat gur ohfurf gurl oenlrq; haqre gur arggyrf gurl jrer
tngurerq gbtrgure.

30:8 Gurl jrer puvyqera bs sbbyf, lrn, puvyqera bs onfr zra: gurl jrer
ivyre guna gur rnegu.

30:9 Naq abj nz V gurve fbat, lrn, V nz gurve oljbeq.

30:10 Gurl noube zr, gurl syrr sne sebz zr, naq fcner abg gb fcvg va
zl snpr.

30:11 Orpnhfr ur ungu ybbfrq zl pbeq, naq nssyvpgrq zr, gurl unir nyfb
yrg ybbfr gur oevqyr orsber zr.

30:12 Hcba zl evtug unaq evfr gur lbhgu; gurl chfu njnl zl srrg, naq
gurl envfr hc ntnvafg zr gur jnlf bs gurve qrfgehpgvba.

30:13 Gurl zne zl cngu, gurl frg sbejneq zl pnynzvgl, gurl unir ab
urycre.

30:14 Gurl pnzr hcba zr nf n jvqr oernxvat va bs jngref: va gur
qrfbyngvba gurl ebyyrq gurzfryirf hcba zr.

30:15 Greebef ner ghearq hcba zr: gurl chefhr zl fbhy nf gur jvaq: naq
zl jrysner cnffrgu njnl nf n pybhq.

30:16 Naq abj zl fbhy vf cbherq bhg hcba zr; gur qnlf bs nssyvpgvba
unir gnxra ubyq hcba zr.

30:17 Zl obarf ner cvreprq va zr va gur avtug frnfba: naq zl fvarjf
gnxr ab erfg.

30:18 Ol gur terng sbepr bs zl qvfrnfr vf zl tnezrag punatrq: vg
ovaqrgu zr nobhg nf gur pbyyne bs zl pbng.

30:19 Ur ungu pnfg zr vagb gur zver, naq V nz orpbzr yvxr qhfg naq
nfurf.

30:20 V pel hagb gurr, naq gubh qbfg abg urne zr: V fgnaq hc, naq gubh
ertneqrfg zr abg.

30:21 Gubh neg orpbzr pehry gb zr: jvgu gul fgebat unaq gubh bccbfrfg
gulfrys ntnvafg zr.

30:22 Gubh yvsgrfg zr hc gb gur jvaq; gubh pnhfrfg zr gb evqr hcba vg,
naq qvffbyirfg zl fhofgnapr.

30:23 Sbe V xabj gung gubh jvyg oevat zr gb qrngu, naq gb gur ubhfr
nccbvagrq sbe nyy yvivat.

30:24 Ubjorvg ur jvyy abg fgergpu bhg uvf unaq gb gur tenir, gubhtu
gurl pel va uvf qrfgehpgvba.

30:25 Qvq abg V jrrc sbe uvz gung jnf va gebhoyr? jnf abg zl fbhy
tevrirq sbe gur cbbe?  30:26 Jura V ybbxrq sbe tbbq, gura rivy pnzr
hagb zr: naq jura V jnvgrq sbe yvtug, gurer pnzr qnexarff.

30:27 Zl objryf obvyrq, naq erfgrq abg: gur qnlf bs nssyvpgvba
ceriragrq zr.

30:28 V jrag zbheavat jvgubhg gur fha: V fgbbq hc, naq V pevrq va gur
pbatertngvba.

30:29 V nz n oebgure gb qentbaf, naq n pbzcnavba gb bjyf.

30:30 Zl fxva vf oynpx hcba zr, naq zl obarf ner ohearq jvgu urng.

30:31 Zl unec nyfb vf ghearq gb zbheavat, naq zl betna vagb gur ibvpr
bs gurz gung jrrc.

31:1 V znqr n pbiranag jvgu zvar rlrf; jul gura fubhyq V guvax hcba n
znvq?  31:2 Sbe jung cbegvba bs Tbq vf gurer sebz nobir? naq jung
vaurevgnapr bs gur Nyzvtugl sebz ba uvtu?  31:3 Vf abg qrfgehpgvba gb
gur jvpxrq? naq n fgenatr chavfuzrag gb gur jbexref bs vavdhvgl?  31:4
Qbgu abg ur frr zl jnlf, naq pbhag nyy zl fgrcf?  31:5 Vs V unir
jnyxrq jvgu inavgl, be vs zl sbbg ungu unfgrq gb qrprvg; 31:6 Yrg zr
or jrvturq va na rira onynapr gung Tbq znl xabj zvar vagrtevgl.

31:7 Vs zl fgrc ungu ghearq bhg bs gur jnl, naq zvar urneg jnyxrq
nsgre zvar rlrf, naq vs nal oybg ungu pyrnirq gb zvar unaqf; 31:8 Gura
yrg zr fbj, naq yrg nabgure rng; lrn, yrg zl bssfcevat or ebbgrq bhg.

31:9 Vs zvar urneg unir orra qrprvirq ol n jbzna, be vs V unir ynvq
jnvg ng zl arvtuobhe'f qbbe; 31:10 Gura yrg zl jvsr tevaq hagb
nabgure, naq yrg bguref obj qbja hcba ure.

31:11 Sbe guvf vf na urvabhf pevzr; lrn, vg vf na vavdhvgl gb or
chavfurq ol gur whqtrf.

31:12 Sbe vg vf n sver gung pbafhzrgu gb qrfgehpgvba, naq jbhyq ebbg
bhg nyy zvar vapernfr.

31:13 Vs V qvq qrfcvfr gur pnhfr bs zl znafreinag be bs zl
znvqfreinag, jura gurl pbagraqrq jvgu zr; 31:14 Jung gura funyy V qb
jura Tbq evfrgu hc? naq jura ur ivfvgrgu, jung funyy V nafjre uvz?
31:15 Qvq abg ur gung znqr zr va gur jbzo znxr uvz? naq qvq abg bar
snfuvba hf va gur jbzo?  31:16 Vs V unir jvguuryq gur cbbe sebz gurve
qrfver, be unir pnhfrq gur rlrf bs gur jvqbj gb snvy; 31:17 Be unir
rngra zl zbefry zlfrys nybar, naq gur sngureyrff ungu abg rngra
gurerbs; 31:18 (Sbe sebz zl lbhgu ur jnf oebhtug hc jvgu zr, nf jvgu n
sngure, naq V unir thvqrq ure sebz zl zbgure'f jbzo;) 31:19 Vs V unir
frra nal crevfu sbe jnag bs pybguvat, be nal cbbe jvgubhg pbirevat;
31:20 Vs uvf ybvaf unir abg oyrffrq zr, naq vs ur jrer abg jnezrq jvgu
gur syrrpr bs zl furrc; 31:21 Vs V unir yvsgrq hc zl unaq ntnvafg gur
sngureyrff, jura V fnj zl uryc va gur tngr: 31:22 Gura yrg zvar nez
snyy sebz zl fubhyqre oynqr, naq zvar nez or oebxra sebz gur obar.

31:23 Sbe qrfgehpgvba sebz Tbq jnf n greebe gb zr, naq ol ernfba bs
uvf uvtuarff V pbhyq abg raqher.

31:24 Vs V unir znqr tbyq zl ubcr, be unir fnvq gb gur svar tbyq, Gubh
neg zl pbasvqrapr; 31:25 Vs V erwbvpr orpnhfr zl jrnygu jnf terng, naq
orpnhfr zvar unaq unq tbggra zhpu; 31:26 Vs V oruryq gur fha jura vg
fuvarq, be gur zbba jnyxvat va oevtugarff; 31:27 Naq zl urneg ungu
orra frpergyl ragvprq, be zl zbhgu ungu xvffrq zl unaq: 31:28 Guvf
nyfb jrer na vavdhvgl gb or chavfurq ol gur whqtr: sbe V fubhyq unir
qravrq gur Tbq gung vf nobir.

31:29 Vs V erwbvpr ng gur qrfgehpgvba bs uvz gung ungrq zr, be yvsgrq
hc zlfrys jura rivy sbhaq uvz: 31:30 Arvgure unir V fhssrerq zl zbhgu
gb fva ol jvfuvat n phefr gb uvf fbhy.

31:31 Vs gur zra bs zl gnoreanpyr fnvq abg, Bu gung jr unq bs uvf
syrfu!  jr pnaabg or fngvfsvrq.

31:32 Gur fgenatre qvq abg ybqtr va gur fgerrg: ohg V bcrarq zl qbbef
gb gur geniryyre.

31:33 Vs V pbirerq zl genafterffvbaf nf Nqnz, ol uvqvat zvar vavdhvgl
va zl obfbz: 31:34 Qvq V srne n terng zhygvghqr, be qvq gur pbagrzcg
bs snzvyvrf greevsl zr, gung V xrcg fvyrapr, naq jrag abg bhg bs gur
qbbe?  31:35 Bu gung bar jbhyq urne zr! orubyq, zl qrfver vf, gung gur
Nyzvtugl jbhyq nafjre zr, naq gung zvar nqirefnel unq jevggra n obbx.

31:36 Fheryl V jbhyq gnxr vg hcba zl fubhyqre, naq ovaq vg nf n pebja
gb zr.

31:37 V jbhyq qrpyner hagb uvz gur ahzore bs zl fgrcf; nf n cevapr
jbhyq V tb arne hagb uvz.

31:38 Vs zl ynaq pel ntnvafg zr, be gung gur sheebjf yvxrjvfr gurerbs
pbzcynva; 31:39 Vs V unir rngra gur sehvgf gurerbs jvgubhg zbarl, be
unir pnhfrq gur bjaref gurerbs gb ybfr gurve yvsr: 31:40 Yrg guvfgyrf
tebj vafgrnq bs jurng, naq pbpxyr vafgrnq bs oneyrl.

Gur jbeqf bs Wbo ner raqrq.

32:1 Fb gurfr guerr zra prnfrq gb nafjre Wbo, orpnhfr ur jnf evtugrbhf
va uvf bja rlrf.

32:2 Gura jnf xvaqyrq gur jengu bs Ryvuh gur fba bs Onenpury gur
Ohmvgr, bs gur xvaqerq bs Enz: ntnvafg Wbo jnf uvf jengu xvaqyrq,
orpnhfr ur whfgvsvrq uvzfrys engure guna Tbq.

32:3 Nyfb ntnvafg uvf guerr sevraqf jnf uvf jengu xvaqyrq, orpnhfr
gurl unq sbhaq ab nafjre, naq lrg unq pbaqrzarq Wbo.

32:4 Abj Ryvuh unq jnvgrq gvyy Wbo unq fcbxra, orpnhfr gurl jrer ryqre
guna ur.

32:5 Jura Ryvuh fnj gung gurer jnf ab nafjre va gur zbhgu bs gurfr
guerr zra, gura uvf jengu jnf xvaqyrq.

32:6 Naq Ryvuh gur fba bs Onenpury gur Ohmvgr nafjrerq naq fnvq, V nz
lbhat, naq lr ner irel byq; jurersber V jnf nsenvq, naq qhefg abg furj
lbh zvar bcvavba.

32:7 V fnvq, Qnlf fubhyq fcrnx, naq zhygvghqr bs lrnef fubhyq grnpu
jvfqbz.

32:8 Ohg gurer vf n fcvevg va zna: naq gur vafcvengvba bs gur Nyzvtugl
tvirgu gurz haqrefgnaqvat.

32:9 Terng zra ner abg nyjnlf jvfr: arvgure qb gur ntrq haqrefgnaq
whqtzrag.

32:10 Gurersber V fnvq, Urnexra gb zr; V nyfb jvyy furj zvar bcvavba.

32:11 Orubyq, V jnvgrq sbe lbhe jbeqf; V tnir rne gb lbhe ernfbaf,
juvyfg lr frnepurq bhg jung gb fnl.

32:12 Lrn, V nggraqrq hagb lbh, naq, orubyq, gurer jnf abar bs lbh
gung pbaivaprq Wbo, be gung nafjrerq uvf jbeqf: 32:13 Yrfg lr fubhyq
fnl, Jr unir sbhaq bhg jvfqbz: Tbq guehfgrgu uvz qbja, abg zna.

32:14 Abj ur ungu abg qverpgrq uvf jbeqf ntnvafg zr: arvgure jvyy V
nafjre uvz jvgu lbhe fcrrpurf.

32:15 Gurl jrer nznmrq, gurl nafjrerq ab zber: gurl yrsg bss fcrnxvat.

32:16 Jura V unq jnvgrq, (sbe gurl fcnxr abg, ohg fgbbq fgvyy, naq
nafjrerq ab zber;) 32:17 V fnvq, V jvyy nafjre nyfb zl cneg, V nyfb
jvyy furj zvar bcvavba.

32:18 Sbe V nz shyy bs znggre, gur fcvevg jvguva zr pbafgenvargu zr.

32:19 Orubyq, zl oryyl vf nf jvar juvpu ungu ab irag; vg vf ernql gb
ohefg yvxr arj obggyrf.

32:20 V jvyy fcrnx, gung V znl or erserfurq: V jvyy bcra zl yvcf naq
nafjre.

32:21 Yrg zr abg, V cenl lbh, npprcg nal zna'f crefba, arvgure yrg zr
tvir synggrevat gvgyrf hagb zna.

32:22 Sbe V xabj abg gb tvir synggrevat gvgyrf; va fb qbvat zl znxre
jbhyq fbba gnxr zr njnl.

33:1 Jurersber, Wbo, V cenl gurr, urne zl fcrrpurf, naq urnexra gb nyy
zl jbeqf.

33:2 Orubyq, abj V unir bcrarq zl zbhgu, zl gbathr ungu fcbxra va zl
zbhgu.

33:3 Zl jbeqf funyy or bs gur hcevtugarff bs zl urneg: naq zl yvcf
funyy hggre xabjyrqtr pyrneyl.

33:4 Gur fcvevg bs Tbq ungu znqr zr, naq gur oerngu bs gur Nyzvtugl
ungu tvira zr yvsr.

33:5 Vs gubh pnafg nafjre zr, frg gul jbeqf va beqre orsber zr, fgnaq
hc.

33:6 Orubyq, V nz nppbeqvat gb gul jvfu va Tbq'f fgrnq: V nyfb nz
sbezrq bhg bs gur pynl.

33:7 Orubyq, zl greebe funyy abg znxr gurr nsenvq, arvgure funyy zl
unaq or urnil hcba gurr.

33:8 Fheryl gubh unfg fcbxra va zvar urnevat, naq V unir urneq gur
ibvpr bs gul jbeqf, fnlvat, 33:9 V nz pyrna jvgubhg genafterffvba, V
nz vaabprag; arvgure vf gurer vavdhvgl va zr.

33:10 Orubyq, ur svaqrgu bppnfvbaf ntnvafg zr, ur pbhagrgu zr sbe uvf
rarzl, 33:11 Ur chggrgu zl srrg va gur fgbpxf, ur znexrgu nyy zl
cnguf.

33:12 Orubyq, va guvf gubh neg abg whfg: V jvyy nafjre gurr, gung Tbq
vf terngre guna zna.

33:13 Jul qbfg gubh fgevir ntnvafg uvz? sbe ur tvirgu abg nppbhag bs
nal bs uvf znggref.

33:14 Sbe Tbq fcrnxrgu bapr, lrn gjvpr, lrg zna creprvirgu vg abg.

33:15 Va n qernz, va n ivfvba bs gur avtug, jura qrrc fyrrc snyyrgu
hcba zra, va fyhzorevatf hcba gur orq; 33:16 Gura ur bcrargu gur rnef
bs zra, naq frnyrgu gurve vafgehpgvba, 33:17 Gung ur znl jvguqenj zna
sebz uvf checbfr, naq uvqr cevqr sebz zna.

33:18 Ur xrrcrgu onpx uvf fbhy sebz gur cvg, naq uvf yvsr sebz
crevfuvat ol gur fjbeq.

33:19 Ur vf punfgrarq nyfb jvgu cnva hcba uvf orq, naq gur zhygvghqr
bs uvf obarf jvgu fgebat cnva: 33:20 Fb gung uvf yvsr noubeergu oernq,
naq uvf fbhy qnvagl zrng.

33:21 Uvf syrfu vf pbafhzrq njnl, gung vg pnaabg or frra; naq uvf
obarf gung jrer abg frra fgvpx bhg.

33:22 Lrn, uvf fbhy qenjrgu arne hagb gur tenir, naq uvf yvsr gb gur
qrfgeblref.

33:23 Vs gurer or n zrffratre jvgu uvz, na vagrecergre, bar nzbat n
gubhfnaq, gb furj hagb zna uvf hcevtugarff: 33:24 Gura ur vf tenpvbhf
hagb uvz, naq fnvgu, Qryvire uvz sebz tbvat qbja gb gur cvg: V unir
sbhaq n enafbz.

33:25 Uvf syrfu funyy or serfure guna n puvyq'f: ur funyy erghea gb
gur qnlf bs uvf lbhgu: 33:26 Ur funyy cenl hagb Tbq, naq ur jvyy or
snibhenoyr hagb uvz: naq ur funyy frr uvf snpr jvgu wbl: sbe ur jvyy
eraqre hagb zna uvf evtugrbhfarff.

33:27 Ur ybbxrgu hcba zra, naq vs nal fnl, V unir fvaarq, naq
creiregrq gung juvpu jnf evtug, naq vg cebsvgrq zr abg; 33:28 Ur jvyy
qryvire uvf fbhy sebz tbvat vagb gur cvg, naq uvf yvsr funyy frr gur
yvtug.

33:29 Yb, nyy gurfr guvatf jbexrgu Tbq bsgragvzrf jvgu zna, 33:30 Gb
oevat onpx uvf fbhy sebz gur cvg, gb or rayvtugrarq jvgu gur yvtug bs
gur yvivat.

33:31 Znex jryy, B Wbo, urnexra hagb zr: ubyq gul crnpr, naq V jvyy
fcrnx.

33:32 Vs gubh unfg nalguvat gb fnl, nafjre zr: fcrnx, sbe V qrfver gb
whfgvsl gurr.

33:33 Vs abg, urnexra hagb zr: ubyq gul crnpr, naq V funyy grnpu gurr
jvfqbz.

34:1 Shegurezber Ryvuh nafjrerq naq fnvq, 34:2 Urne zl jbeqf, B lr
jvfr zra; naq tvir rne hagb zr, lr gung unir xabjyrqtr.

34:3 Sbe gur rne gevrgu jbeqf, nf gur zbhgu gnfgrgu zrng.

34:4 Yrg hf pubbfr gb hf whqtzrag: yrg hf xabj nzbat bhefryirf jung vf
tbbq.

34:5 Sbe Wbo ungu fnvq, V nz evtugrbhf: naq Tbq ungu gnxra njnl zl
whqtzrag.

34:6 Fubhyq V yvr ntnvafg zl evtug? zl jbhaq vf vaphenoyr jvgubhg
genafterffvba.

34:7 Jung zna vf yvxr Wbo, jub qevaxrgu hc fpbeavat yvxr jngre?  34:8
Juvpu tbrgu va pbzcnal jvgu gur jbexref bs vavdhvgl, naq jnyxrgu jvgu
jvpxrq zra.

34:9 Sbe ur ungu fnvq, Vg cebsvgrgu n zna abguvat gung ur fubhyq
qryvtug uvzfrys jvgu Tbq.

34:10 Gurersber urnexra hagb zr lr zra bs haqrefgnaqvat: sne or vg
sebz Tbq, gung ur fubhyq qb jvpxrqarff; naq sebz gur Nyzvtugl, gung ur
fubhyq pbzzvg vavdhvgl.

34:11 Sbe gur jbex bs n zna funyy ur eraqre hagb uvz, naq pnhfr rirel
zna gb svaq nppbeqvat gb uvf jnlf.

34:12 Lrn, fheryl Tbq jvyy abg qb jvpxrqyl, arvgure jvyy gur Nyzvtugl
creireg whqtzrag.

34:13 Jub ungu tvira uvz n punetr bire gur rnegu? be jub ungu qvfcbfrq
gur jubyr jbeyq?  34:14 Vs ur frg uvf urneg hcba zna, vs ur tngure
hagb uvzfrys uvf fcvevg naq uvf oerngu; 34:15 Nyy syrfu funyy crevfu
gbtrgure, naq zna funyy ghea ntnva hagb qhfg.

34:16 Vs abj gubh unfg haqrefgnaqvat, urne guvf: urnexra gb gur ibvpr
bs zl jbeqf.

34:17 Funyy rira ur gung ungrgu evtug tbirea? naq jvyg gubh pbaqrza
uvz gung vf zbfg whfg?  34:18 Vf vg svg gb fnl gb n xvat, Gubh neg
jvpxrq? naq gb cevaprf, Lr ner hatbqyl?  34:19 Ubj zhpu yrff gb uvz
gung npprcgrgu abg gur crefbaf bs cevaprf, abe ertneqrgu gur evpu zber
guna gur cbbe? sbe gurl nyy ner gur jbex bs uvf unaqf.

34:20 Va n zbzrag funyy gurl qvr, naq gur crbcyr funyy or gebhoyrq ng
zvqavtug, naq cnff njnl: naq gur zvtugl funyy or gnxra njnl jvgubhg
unaq.

34:21 Sbe uvf rlrf ner hcba gur jnlf bs zna, naq ur frrgu nyy uvf
tbvatf.

34:22 Gurer vf ab qnexarff, abe funqbj bs qrngu, jurer gur jbexref bs
vavdhvgl znl uvqr gurzfryirf.

34:23 Sbe ur jvyy abg ynl hcba zna zber guna evtug; gung ur fubhyq
ragre vagb whqtzrag jvgu Tbq.

34:24 Ur funyy oernx va cvrprf zvtugl zra jvgubhg ahzore, naq frg
bguref va gurve fgrnq.

34:25 Gurersber ur xabjrgu gurve jbexf, naq ur biregheargu gurz va gur
avtug, fb gung gurl ner qrfgeblrq.

34:26 Ur fgevxrgu gurz nf jvpxrq zra va gur bcra fvtug bs bguref;
34:27 Orpnhfr gurl ghearq onpx sebz uvz, naq jbhyq abg pbafvqre nal bs
uvf jnlf: 34:28 Fb gung gurl pnhfr gur pel bs gur cbbe gb pbzr hagb
uvz, naq ur urnergu gur pel bs gur nssyvpgrq.

34:29 Jura ur tvirgu dhvrgarff, jub gura pna znxr gebhoyr? naq jura ur
uvqrgu uvf snpr, jub gura pna orubyq uvz? jurgure vg or qbar ntnvafg n
angvba, be ntnvafg n zna bayl: 34:30 Gung gur ulcbpevgr ervta abg,
yrfg gur crbcyr or rafanerq.

34:31 Fheryl vg vf zrrg gb or fnvq hagb Tbq, V unir obear
punfgvfrzrag, V jvyy abg bssraq nal zber: 34:32 Gung juvpu V frr abg
grnpu gubh zr: vs V unir qbar vavdhvgl, V jvyy qb ab zber.

34:33 Fubhyq vg or nppbeqvat gb gul zvaq? ur jvyy erpbzcrafr vg,
jurgure gubh ershfr, be jurgure gubh pubbfr; naq abg V: gurersber
fcrnx jung gubh xabjrfg.

34:34 Yrg zra bs haqrefgnaqvat gryy zr, naq yrg n jvfr zna urnexra
hagb zr.

34:35 Wbo ungu fcbxra jvgubhg xabjyrqtr, naq uvf jbeqf jrer jvgubhg
jvfqbz.

34:36 Zl qrfver vf gung Wbo znl or gevrq hagb gur raq orpnhfr bs uvf
nafjref sbe jvpxrq zra.

34:37 Sbe ur nqqrgu eroryyvba hagb uvf fva, ur pynccrgu uvf unaqf
nzbat hf, naq zhygvcyvrgu uvf jbeqf ntnvafg Tbq.

35:1 Ryvuh fcnxr zberbire, naq fnvq, 35:2 Guvaxrfg gubh guvf gb or
evtug, gung gubh fnvqfg, Zl evtugrbhfarff vf zber guna Tbq'f?  35:3
Sbe gubh fnvqfg, Jung nqinagntr jvyy vg or hagb gurr? naq, Jung cebsvg
funyy V unir, vs V or pyrnafrq sebz zl fva?  35:4 V jvyy nafjre gurr,
naq gul pbzcnavbaf jvgu gurr.

35:5 Ybbx hagb gur urniraf, naq frr; naq orubyq gur pybhqf juvpu ner
uvture guna gubh.

35:6 Vs gubh fvaarfg, jung qbrfg gubh ntnvafg uvz? be vs gul
genafterffvbaf or zhygvcyvrq, jung qbrfg gubh hagb uvz?  35:7 Vs gubh
or evtugrbhf, jung tvirfg gubh uvz? be jung erprvirgu ur bs guvar
unaq?  35:8 Gul jvpxrqarff znl uheg n zna nf gubh neg; naq gul
evtugrbhfarff znl cebsvg gur fba bs zna.

35:9 Ol ernfba bs gur zhygvghqr bs bccerffvbaf gurl znxr gur bccerffrq
gb pel: gurl pel bhg ol ernfba bs gur nez bs gur zvtugl.

35:10 Ohg abar fnvgu, Jurer vf Tbq zl znxre, jub tvirgu fbatf va gur
avtug; 35:11 Jub grnpurgu hf zber guna gur ornfgf bs gur rnegu, naq
znxrgu hf jvfre guna gur sbjyf bs urnira?  35:12 Gurer gurl pel, ohg
abar tvirgu nafjre, orpnhfr bs gur cevqr bs rivy zra.

35:13 Fheryl Tbq jvyy abg urne inavgl, arvgure jvyy gur Nyzvtugl
ertneq vg.

35:14 Nygubhtu gubh fnlrfg gubh funyg abg frr uvz, lrg whqtzrag vf
orsber uvz; gurersber gehfg gubh va uvz.

35:15 Ohg abj, orpnhfr vg vf abg fb, ur ungu ivfvgrq va uvf natre; lrg
ur xabjrgu vg abg va terng rkgerzvgl: 35:16 Gurersber qbgu Wbo bcra
uvf zbhgu va inva; ur zhygvcyvrgu jbeqf jvgubhg xabjyrqtr.

36:1 Ryvuh nyfb cebprrqrq, naq fnvq, 36:2 Fhssre zr n yvggyr, naq V
jvyy furj gurr gung V unir lrg gb fcrnx ba Tbq'f orunys.

36:3 V jvyy srgpu zl xabjyrqtr sebz nsne, naq jvyy nfpevor
evtugrbhfarff gb zl Znxre.

36:4 Sbe gehyl zl jbeqf funyy abg or snyfr: ur gung vf cresrpg va
xabjyrqtr vf jvgu gurr.

36:5 Orubyq, Tbq vf zvtugl, naq qrfcvfrgu abg nal: ur vf zvtugl va
fgeratgu naq jvfqbz.

36:6 Ur cerfreirgu abg gur yvsr bs gur jvpxrq: ohg tvirgu evtug gb gur
cbbe.

36:7 Ur jvguqenjrgu abg uvf rlrf sebz gur evtugrbhf: ohg jvgu xvatf
ner gurl ba gur guebar; lrn, ur qbgu rfgnoyvfu gurz sbe rire, naq gurl
ner rknygrq.

36:8 Naq vs gurl or obhaq va srggref, naq or ubyqra va pbeqf bs
nssyvpgvba; 36:9 Gura ur furjrgu gurz gurve jbex, naq gurve
genafterffvbaf gung gurl unir rkprrqrq.

36:10 Ur bcrargu nyfb gurve rne gb qvfpvcyvar, naq pbzznaqrgu gung
gurl erghea sebz vavdhvgl.

36:11 Vs gurl borl naq freir uvz, gurl funyy fcraq gurve qnlf va
cebfcrevgl, naq gurve lrnef va cyrnfherf.

36:12 Ohg vs gurl borl abg, gurl funyy crevfu ol gur fjbeq, naq gurl
funyy qvr jvgubhg xabjyrqtr.

36:13 Ohg gur ulcbpevgrf va urneg urnc hc jengu: gurl pel abg jura ur
ovaqrgu gurz.

36:14 Gurl qvr va lbhgu, naq gurve yvsr vf nzbat gur hapyrna.

36:15 Ur qryvirergu gur cbbe va uvf nssyvpgvba, naq bcrargu gurve rnef
va bccerffvba.

36:16 Rira fb jbhyq ur unir erzbirq gurr bhg bs gur fgenvg vagb n
oebnq cynpr, jurer gurer vf ab fgenvgarff; naq gung juvpu fubhyq or
frg ba gul gnoyr fubhyq or shyy bs sngarff.

36:17 Ohg gubh unfg shysvyyrq gur whqtzrag bs gur jvpxrq: whqtzrag naq
whfgvpr gnxr ubyq ba gurr.

36:18 Orpnhfr gurer vf jengu, orjner yrfg ur gnxr gurr njnl jvgu uvf
fgebxr: gura n terng enafbz pnaabg qryvire gurr.

36:19 Jvyy ur rfgrrz gul evpurf? ab, abg tbyq, abe nyy gur sbeprf bs
fgeratgu.

36:20 Qrfver abg gur avtug, jura crbcyr ner phg bss va gurve cynpr.

36:21 Gnxr urrq, ertneq abg vavdhvgl: sbe guvf unfg gubh pubfra engure
guna nssyvpgvba.

36:22 Orubyq, Tbq rknygrgu ol uvf cbjre: jub grnpurgu yvxr uvz?  36:23
Jub ungu rawbvarq uvz uvf jnl? be jub pna fnl, Gubh unfg jebhtug
vavdhvgl?  36:24 Erzrzore gung gubh zntavsl uvf jbex, juvpu zra
orubyq.

36:25 Rirel zna znl frr vg; zna znl orubyq vg nsne bss.

36:26 Orubyq, Tbq vf terng, naq jr xabj uvz abg, arvgure pna gur
ahzore bs uvf lrnef or frnepurq bhg.

36:27 Sbe ur znxrgu fznyy gur qebcf bs jngre: gurl cbhe qbja enva
nppbeqvat gb gur incbhe gurerbs: 36:28 Juvpu gur pybhqf qb qebc naq
qvfgvy hcba zna nohaqnagyl.

36:29 Nyfb pna nal haqrefgnaq gur fcernqvatf bs gur pybhqf, be gur
abvfr bs uvf gnoreanpyr?  36:30 Orubyq, ur fcernqrgu uvf yvtug hcba
vg, naq pbirergu gur obggbz bs gur frn.

36:31 Sbe ol gurz whqtrgu ur gur crbcyr; ur tvirgu zrng va nohaqnapr.

36:32 Jvgu pybhqf ur pbirergu gur yvtug; naq pbzznaqrgu vg abg gb
fuvar ol gur pybhq gung pbzrgu orgjvkg.

36:33 Gur abvfr gurerbs furjrgu pbapreavat vg, gur pnggyr nyfb
pbapreavat gur incbhe.

37:1 Ng guvf nyfb zl urneg gerzoyrgu, naq vf zbirq bhg bs uvf cynpr.

37:2 Urne nggragviryl gur abvfr bs uvf ibvpr, naq gur fbhaq gung tbrgu
bhg bs uvf zbhgu.

37:3 Ur qverpgrgu vg haqre gur jubyr urnira, naq uvf yvtugavat hagb
gur raqf bs gur rnegu.

37:4 Nsgre vg n ibvpr ebnergu: ur guhaqrergu jvgu gur ibvpr bs uvf
rkpryyrapl; naq ur jvyy abg fgnl gurz jura uvf ibvpr vf urneq.

37:5 Tbq guhaqrergu zneiryybhfyl jvgu uvf ibvpr; terng guvatf qbrgu
ur, juvpu jr pnaabg pbzceruraq.

37:6 Sbe ur fnvgu gb gur fabj, Or gubh ba gur rnegu; yvxrjvfr gb gur
fznyy enva, naq gb gur terng enva bs uvf fgeratgu.

37:7 Ur frnyrgu hc gur unaq bs rirel zna; gung nyy zra znl xabj uvf
jbex.

37:8 Gura gur ornfgf tb vagb qraf, naq erznva va gurve cynprf.

37:9 Bhg bs gur fbhgu pbzrgu gur juveyjvaq: naq pbyq bhg bs gur abegu.

37:10 Ol gur oerngu bs Tbq sebfg vf tvira: naq gur oernqgu bs gur
jngref vf fgenvgrarq.

37:11 Nyfb ol jngrevat ur jrnevrgu gur guvpx pybhq: ur fpnggrergu uvf
oevtug pybhq: 37:12 Naq vg vf ghearq ebhaq nobhg ol uvf pbhafryf: gung
gurl znl qb jungfbrire ur pbzznaqrgu gurz hcba gur snpr bs gur jbeyq
va gur rnegu.

37:13 Ur pnhfrgu vg gb pbzr, jurgure sbe pbeerpgvba, be sbe uvf ynaq,
be sbe zrepl.

37:14 Urnexra hagb guvf, B Wbo: fgnaq fgvyy, naq pbafvqre gur jbaqebhf
jbexf bs Tbq.

37:15 Qbfg gubh xabj jura Tbq qvfcbfrq gurz, naq pnhfrq gur yvtug bs
uvf pybhq gb fuvar?  37:16 Qbfg gubh xabj gur onynapvatf bs gur
pybhqf, gur jbaqebhf jbexf bs uvz juvpu vf cresrpg va xabjyrqtr?
37:17 Ubj gul tnezragf ner jnez, jura ur dhvrgrgu gur rnegu ol gur
fbhgu jvaq?  37:18 Unfg gubh jvgu uvz fcernq bhg gur fxl, juvpu vf
fgebat, naq nf n zbygra ybbxvat tynff?  37:19 Grnpu hf jung jr funyy
fnl hagb uvz; sbe jr pnaabg beqre bhe fcrrpu ol ernfba bs qnexarff.

37:20 Funyy vg or gbyq uvz gung V fcrnx? vs n zna fcrnx, fheryl ur
funyy or fjnyybjrq hc.

37:21 Naq abj zra frr abg gur oevtug yvtug juvpu vf va gur pybhqf: ohg
gur jvaq cnffrgu, naq pyrnafrgu gurz.

37:22 Snve jrngure pbzrgu bhg bs gur abegu: jvgu Tbq vf greevoyr
znwrfgl.

37:23 Gbhpuvat gur Nyzvtugl, jr pnaabg svaq uvz bhg: ur vf rkpryyrag
va cbjre, naq va whqtzrag, naq va cyragl bs whfgvpr: ur jvyy abg
nssyvpg.

37:24 Zra qb gurersber srne uvz: ur erfcrpgrgu abg nal gung ner jvfr
bs urneg.

38:1 Gura gur YBEQ nafjrerq Wbo bhg bs gur juveyjvaq, naq fnvq, 38:2
Jub vf guvf gung qnexrargu pbhafry ol jbeqf jvgubhg xabjyrqtr?  38:3
Tveq hc abj gul ybvaf yvxr n zna; sbe V jvyy qrznaq bs gurr, naq
nafjre gubh zr.

38:4 Jurer jnfg gubh jura V ynvq gur sbhaqngvbaf bs gur rnegu?
qrpyner, vs gubh unfg haqrefgnaqvat.

38:5 Jub ungu ynvq gur zrnfherf gurerbs, vs gubh xabjrfg? be jub ungu
fgergpurq gur yvar hcba vg?  38:6 Jurerhcba ner gur sbhaqngvbaf
gurerbs snfgrarq? be jub ynvq gur pbeare fgbar gurerbs; 38:7 Jura gur
zbeavat fgnef fnat gbtrgure, naq nyy gur fbaf bs Tbq fubhgrq sbe wbl?
38:8 Be jub fuhg hc gur frn jvgu qbbef, jura vg oenxr sbegu, nf vs vg
unq vffhrq bhg bs gur jbzo?  38:9 Jura V znqr gur pybhq gur tnezrag
gurerbs, naq guvpx qnexarff n fjnqqyvatonaq sbe vg, 38:10 Naq oenxr hc
sbe vg zl qrperrq cynpr, naq frg onef naq qbbef, 38:11 Naq fnvq,
Uvguregb funyg gubh pbzr, ohg ab shegure: naq urer funyy gul cebhq
jnirf or fgnlrq?  38:12 Unfg gubh pbzznaqrq gur zbeavat fvapr gul
qnlf; naq pnhfrq gur qnlfcevat gb xabj uvf cynpr; 38:13 Gung vg zvtug
gnxr ubyq bs gur raqf bs gur rnegu, gung gur jvpxrq zvtug or funxra
bhg bs vg?  38:14 Vg vf ghearq nf pynl gb gur frny; naq gurl fgnaq nf
n tnezrag.

38:15 Naq sebz gur jvpxrq gurve yvtug vf jvguubyqra, naq gur uvtu nez
funyy or oebxra.

38:16 Unfg gubh ragrerq vagb gur fcevatf bs gur frn? be unfg gubh
jnyxrq va gur frnepu bs gur qrcgu?  38:17 Unir gur tngrf bs qrngu orra
bcrarq hagb gurr? be unfg gubh frra gur qbbef bs gur funqbj bs qrngu?
38:18 Unfg gubh creprvirq gur oernqgu bs gur rnegu? qrpyner vs gubh
xabjrfg vg nyy.

38:19 Jurer vf gur jnl jurer yvtug qjryyrgu? naq nf sbe qnexarff,
jurer vf gur cynpr gurerbs, 38:20 Gung gubh fubhyqrfg gnxr vg gb gur
obhaq gurerbs, naq gung gubh fubhyqrfg xabj gur cnguf gb gur ubhfr
gurerbs?  38:21 Xabjrfg gubh vg, orpnhfr gubh jnfg gura obea? be
orpnhfr gur ahzore bs gul qnlf vf terng?  38:22 Unfg gubh ragrerq vagb
gur gernfherf bs gur fabj? be unfg gubh frra gur gernfherf bs gur
unvy, 38:23 Juvpu V unir erfreirq ntnvafg gur gvzr bs gebhoyr, ntnvafg
gur qnl bs onggyr naq jne?  38:24 Ol jung jnl vf gur yvtug cnegrq,
juvpu fpnggrergu gur rnfg jvaq hcba gur rnegu?  38:25 Jub ungu qvivqrq
n jngrepbhefr sbe gur biresybjvat bs jngref, be n jnl sbe gur
yvtugavat bs guhaqre; 38:26 Gb pnhfr vg gb enva ba gur rnegu, jurer ab
zna vf; ba gur jvyqrearff, jurerva gurer vf ab zna; 38:27 Gb fngvfsl
gur qrfbyngr naq jnfgr tebhaq; naq gb pnhfr gur ohq bs gur graqre ureo
gb fcevat sbegu?  38:28 Ungu gur enva n sngure? be jub ungu ortbggra
gur qebcf bs qrj?  38:29 Bhg bs jubfr jbzo pnzr gur vpr? naq gur ubnel
sebfg bs urnira, jub ungu traqrerq vg?  38:30 Gur jngref ner uvq nf
jvgu n fgbar, naq gur snpr bs gur qrrc vf sebmra.

38:31 Pnafg gubh ovaq gur fjrrg vasyhraprf bs Cyrvnqrf, be ybbfr gur
onaqf bs Bevba?  38:32 Pnafg gubh oevat sbegu Znmmnebgu va uvf frnfba?
be pnafg gubh thvqr Nepghehf jvgu uvf fbaf?  38:33 Xabjrfg gubh gur
beqvanaprf bs urnira? pnafg gubh frg gur qbzvavba gurerbs va gur
rnegu?  38:34 Pnafg gubh yvsg hc gul ibvpr gb gur pybhqf, gung
nohaqnapr bs jngref znl pbire gurr?  38:35 Pnafg gubh fraq yvtugavatf,
gung gurl znl tb naq fnl hagb gurr, Urer jr ner?  38:36 Jub ungu chg
jvfqbz va gur vajneq cnegf? be jub ungu tvira haqrefgnaqvat gb gur
urneg?  38:37 Jub pna ahzore gur pybhqf va jvfqbz? be jub pna fgnl gur
obggyrf bs urnira, 38:38 Jura gur qhfg tebjrgu vagb uneqarff, naq gur
pybqf pyrnir snfg gbtrgure?  38:39 Jvyg gubh uhag gur cerl sbe gur
yvba? be svyy gur nccrgvgr bs gur lbhat yvbaf, 38:40 Jura gurl pbhpu
va gurve qraf, naq novqr va gur pbireg gb yvr va jnvg?  38:41 Jub
cebivqrgu sbe gur enira uvf sbbq? jura uvf lbhat barf pel hagb Tbq,
gurl jnaqre sbe ynpx bs zrng.

39:1 Xabjrfg gubh gur gvzr jura gur jvyq tbngf bs gur ebpx oevat
sbegu? be pnafg gubh znex jura gur uvaqf qb pnyir?  39:2 Pnafg gubh
ahzore gur zbaguf gung gurl shysvy? be xabjrfg gubh gur gvzr jura gurl
oevat sbegu?  39:3 Gurl obj gurzfryirf, gurl oevat sbegu gurve lbhat
barf, gurl pnfg bhg gurve fbeebjf.

39:4 Gurve lbhat barf ner va tbbq yvxvat, gurl tebj hc jvgu pbea; gurl
tb sbegu, naq erghea abg hagb gurz.

39:5 Jub ungu frag bhg gur jvyq nff serr? be jub ungu ybbfrq gur onaqf
bs gur jvyq nff?  39:6 Jubfr ubhfr V unir znqr gur jvyqrearff, naq gur
oneera ynaq uvf qjryyvatf.

39:7 Ur fpbeargu gur zhygvghqr bs gur pvgl, arvgure ertneqrgu ur gur
pelvat bs gur qevire.

39:8 Gur enatr bs gur zbhagnvaf vf uvf cnfgher, naq ur frnepurgu nsgre
rirel terra guvat.

39:9 Jvyy gur havpbea or jvyyvat gb freir gurr, be novqr ol gul pevo?
39:10 Pnafg gubh ovaq gur havpbea jvgu uvf onaq va gur sheebj? be jvyy
ur uneebj gur inyyrlf nsgre gurr?  39:11 Jvyg gubh gehfg uvz, orpnhfr
uvf fgeratgu vf terng? be jvyg gubh yrnir gul ynobhe gb uvz?  39:12
Jvyg gubh oryvrir uvz, gung ur jvyy oevat ubzr gul frrq, naq tngure vg
vagb gul onea?  39:13 Tnirfg gubh gur tbbqyl jvatf hagb gur crnpbpxf?
be jvatf naq srnguref hagb gur bfgevpu?  39:14 Juvpu yrnirgu ure rttf
va gur rnegu, naq jnezrgu gurz va qhfg, 39:15 Naq sbetrggrgu gung gur
sbbg znl pehfu gurz, be gung gur jvyq ornfg znl oernx gurz.

39:16 Fur vf uneqrarq ntnvafg ure lbhat barf, nf gubhtu gurl jrer abg
ure'f: ure ynobhe vf va inva jvgubhg srne; 39:17 Orpnhfr Tbq ungu
qrcevirq ure bs jvfqbz, arvgure ungu ur vzcnegrq gb ure haqrefgnaqvat.

39:18 Jung gvzr fur yvsgrgu hc urefrys ba uvtu, fur fpbeargu gur ubefr
naq uvf evqre.

39:19 Unfg gubh tvira gur ubefr fgeratgu? unfg gubh pybgurq uvf arpx
jvgu guhaqre?  39:20 Pnafg gubh znxr uvz nsenvq nf n tenffubccre? gur
tybel bs uvf abfgevyf vf greevoyr.

39:21 Ur cnjrgu va gur inyyrl, naq erwbvprgu va uvf fgeratgu: ur tbrgu
ba gb zrrg gur nezrq zra.

39:22 Ur zbpxrgu ng srne, naq vf abg nssevtugrq; arvgure gheargu ur
onpx sebz gur fjbeq.

39:23 Gur dhvire enggyrgu ntnvafg uvz, gur tyvggrevat fcrne naq gur
fuvryq.

39:24 Ur fjnyybjrgu gur tebhaq jvgu svreprarff naq entr: arvgure
oryvrirgu ur gung vg vf gur fbhaq bs gur gehzcrg.

39:25 Ur fnvgu nzbat gur gehzcrgf, Un, un; naq ur fzryyrgu gur onggyr
nsne bss, gur guhaqre bs gur pncgnvaf, naq gur fubhgvat.

39:26 Qbgu gur unjx syl ol gul jvfqbz, naq fgergpu ure jvatf gbjneq
gur fbhgu?  39:27 Qbgu gur rntyr zbhag hc ng gul pbzznaq, naq znxr ure
arfg ba uvtu?  39:28 Fur qjryyrgu naq novqrgu ba gur ebpx, hcba gur
pent bs gur ebpx, naq gur fgebat cynpr.

39:29 Sebz gurapr fur frrxrgu gur cerl, naq ure rlrf orubyq nsne bss.

39:30 Ure lbhat barf nyfb fhpx hc oybbq: naq jurer gur fynva ner,
gurer vf fur.

40:1 Zberbire gur YBEQ nafjrerq Wbo, naq fnvq, 40:2 Funyy ur gung
pbagraqrgu jvgu gur Nyzvtugl vafgehpg uvz? ur gung ercebirgu Tbq, yrg
uvz nafjre vg.

40:3 Gura Wbo nafjrerq gur YBEQ, naq fnvq, 40:4 Orubyq, V nz ivyr;
jung funyy V nafjre gurr? V jvyy ynl zvar unaq hcba zl zbhgu.

40:5 Bapr unir V fcbxra; ohg V jvyy abg nafjre: lrn, gjvpr; ohg V jvyy
cebprrq ab shegure.

40:6 Gura nafjrerq gur YBEQ hagb Wbo bhg bs gur juveyjvaq, naq fnvq,
40:7 Tveq hc gul ybvaf abj yvxr n zna: V jvyy qrznaq bs gurr, naq
qrpyner gubh hagb zr.

40:8 Jvyg gubh nyfb qvfnaahy zl whqtzrag? jvyg gubh pbaqrza zr, gung
gubh znlrfg or evtugrbhf?  40:9 Unfg gubh na nez yvxr Tbq? be pnafg
gubh guhaqre jvgu n ibvpr yvxr uvz?  40:10 Qrpx gulfrys abj jvgu
znwrfgl naq rkpryyrapl; naq neenl gulfrys jvgu tybel naq ornhgl.

40:11 Pnfg noebnq gur entr bs gul jengu: naq orubyq rirel bar gung vf
cebhq, naq nonfr uvz.

40:12 Ybbx ba rirel bar gung vf cebhq, naq oevat uvz ybj; naq gernq
qbja gur jvpxrq va gurve cynpr.

40:13 Uvqr gurz va gur qhfg gbtrgure; naq ovaq gurve snprf va frperg.

40:14 Gura jvyy V nyfb pbasrff hagb gurr gung guvar bja evtug unaq pna
fnir gurr.

40:15 Orubyq abj orurzbgu, juvpu V znqr jvgu gurr; ur rngrgu tenff nf
na bk.

40:16 Yb abj, uvf fgeratgu vf va uvf ybvaf, naq uvf sbepr vf va gur
aniry bs uvf oryyl.

40:17 Ur zbirgu uvf gnvy yvxr n prqne: gur fvarjf bs uvf fgbarf ner
jenccrq gbtrgure.

40:18 Uvf obarf ner nf fgebat cvrprf bs oenff; uvf obarf ner yvxr onef
bs veba.

40:19 Ur vf gur puvrs bs gur jnlf bs Tbq: ur gung znqr uvz pna znxr
uvf fjbeq gb nccebnpu hagb uvz.

40:20 Fheryl gur zbhagnvaf oevat uvz sbegu sbbq, jurer nyy gur ornfgf
bs gur svryq cynl.

40:21 Ur yvrgu haqre gur funql gerrf, va gur pbireg bs gur errq, naq
sraf.

40:22 Gur funql gerrf pbire uvz jvgu gurve funqbj; gur jvyybjf bs gur
oebbx pbzcnff uvz nobhg.

40:23 Orubyq, ur qevaxrgu hc n evire, naq unfgrgu abg: ur gehfgrgu
gung ur pna qenj hc Wbeqna vagb uvf zbhgu.

40:24 Ur gnxrgu vg jvgu uvf rlrf: uvf abfr cvreprgu guebhtu fanerf.

41:1 Pnafg gubh qenj bhg yrivnguna jvgu na ubbx? be uvf gbathr jvgu n
pbeq juvpu gubh yrggrfg qbja?  41:2 Pnafg gubh chg na ubbx vagb uvf
abfr? be ober uvf wnj guebhtu jvgu n gubea?  41:3 Jvyy ur znxr znal
fhccyvpngvbaf hagb gurr? jvyy ur fcrnx fbsg jbeqf hagb gurr?  41:4
Jvyy ur znxr n pbiranag jvgu gurr? jvyg gubh gnxr uvz sbe n freinag
sbe rire?  41:5 Jvyg gubh cynl jvgu uvz nf jvgu n oveq? be jvyg gubh
ovaq uvz sbe gul znvqraf?  41:6 Funyy gur pbzcnavbaf znxr n onadhrg bs
uvz? funyy gurl cneg uvz nzbat gur zrepunagf?  41:7 Pnafg gubh svyy
uvf fxva jvgu oneorq vebaf? be uvf urnq jvgu svfu fcrnef?  41:8 Ynl
guvar unaq hcba uvz, erzrzore gur onggyr, qb ab zber.

41:9 Orubyq, gur ubcr bs uvz vf va inva: funyy abg bar or pnfg qbja
rira ng gur fvtug bs uvz?  41:10 Abar vf fb svrepr gung qner fgve uvz
hc: jub gura vf noyr gb fgnaq orsber zr?  41:11 Jub ungu ceriragrq zr,
gung V fubhyq ercnl uvz? jungfbrire vf haqre gur jubyr urnira vf zvar.

41:12 V jvyy abg pbaprny uvf cnegf, abe uvf cbjre, abe uvf pbzryl
cebcbegvba.

41:13 Jub pna qvfpbire gur snpr bs uvf tnezrag? be jub pna pbzr gb uvz
jvgu uvf qbhoyr oevqyr?  41:14 Jub pna bcra gur qbbef bs uvf snpr? uvf
grrgu ner greevoyr ebhaq nobhg.

41:15 Uvf fpnyrf ner uvf cevqr, fuhg hc gbtrgure nf jvgu n pybfr frny.

41:16 Bar vf fb arne gb nabgure, gung ab nve pna pbzr orgjrra gurz.

41:17 Gurl ner wbvarq bar gb nabgure, gurl fgvpx gbtrgure, gung gurl
pnaabg or fhaqrerq.

41:18 Ol uvf arrfvatf n yvtug qbgu fuvar, naq uvf rlrf ner yvxr gur
rlryvqf bs gur zbeavat.

41:19 Bhg bs uvf zbhgu tb oheavat ynzcf, naq fcnexf bs sver yrnc bhg.

41:20 Bhg bs uvf abfgevyf tbrgu fzbxr, nf bhg bs n frrguvat cbg be
pnyqeba.

41:21 Uvf oerngu xvaqyrgu pbnyf, naq n synzr tbrgu bhg bs uvf zbhgu.

41:22 Va uvf arpx erznvargu fgeratgu, naq fbeebj vf ghearq vagb wbl
orsber uvz.

41:23 Gur synxrf bs uvf syrfu ner wbvarq gbtrgure: gurl ner svez va
gurzfryirf; gurl pnaabg or zbirq.

41:24 Uvf urneg vf nf svez nf n fgbar; lrn, nf uneq nf n cvrpr bs gur
argure zvyyfgbar.

41:25 Jura ur envfrgu hc uvzfrys, gur zvtugl ner nsenvq: ol ernfba bs
oernxvatf gurl chevsl gurzfryirf.

41:26 Gur fjbeq bs uvz gung ynlrgu ng uvz pnaabg ubyq: gur fcrne, gur
qneg, abe gur unoretrba.

41:27 Ur rfgrrzrgu veba nf fgenj, naq oenff nf ebggra jbbq.

41:28 Gur neebj pnaabg znxr uvz syrr: fyvatfgbarf ner ghearq jvgu uvz
vagb fghooyr.

41:29 Qnegf ner pbhagrq nf fghooyr: ur ynhturgu ng gur funxvat bs n
fcrne.

41:30 Funec fgbarf ner haqre uvz: ur fcernqrgu funec cbvagrq guvatf
hcba gur zver.

41:31 Ur znxrgu gur qrrc gb obvy yvxr n cbg: ur znxrgu gur frn yvxr n
cbg bs bvagzrag.

41:32 Ur znxrgu n cngu gb fuvar nsgre uvz; bar jbhyq guvax gur qrrc gb
or ubnel.

41:33 Hcba rnegu gurer vf abg uvf yvxr, jub vf znqr jvgubhg srne.

41:34 Ur orubyqrgu nyy uvtu guvatf: ur vf n xvat bire nyy gur puvyqera
bs cevqr.

42:1 Gura Wbo nafjrerq gur YBEQ, naq fnvq, 42:2 V xabj gung gubh pnafg
qb rirel guvat, naq gung ab gubhtug pna or jvguubyqra sebz gurr.

42:3 Jub vf ur gung uvqrgu pbhafry jvgubhg xabjyrqtr? gurersber unir V
hggrerq gung V haqrefgbbq abg; guvatf gbb jbaqreshy sbe zr, juvpu V
xarj abg.

42:4 Urne, V orfrrpu gurr, naq V jvyy fcrnx: V jvyy qrznaq bs gurr,
naq qrpyner gubh hagb zr.

42:5 V unir urneq bs gurr ol gur urnevat bs gur rne: ohg abj zvar rlr
frrgu gurr.

42:6 Jurersber V noube zlfrys, naq ercrag va qhfg naq nfurf.

42:7 Naq vg jnf fb, gung nsgre gur YBEQ unq fcbxra gurfr jbeqf hagb
Wbo, gur YBEQ fnvq gb Ryvcunm gur Grznavgr, Zl jengu vf xvaqyrq
ntnvafg gurr, naq ntnvafg gul gjb sevraqf: sbe lr unir abg fcbxra bs
zr gur guvat gung vf evtug, nf zl freinag Wbo ungu.

42:8 Gurersber gnxr hagb lbh abj frira ohyybpxf naq frira enzf, naq tb
gb zl freinag Wbo, naq bssre hc sbe lbhefryirf n oheag bssrevat; naq
zl freinag Wbo funyy cenl sbe lbh: sbe uvz jvyy V npprcg: yrfg V qrny
jvgu lbh nsgre lbhe sbyyl, va gung lr unir abg fcbxra bs zr gur guvat
juvpu vf evtug, yvxr zl freinag Wbo.

42:9 Fb Ryvcunm gur Grznavgr naq Ovyqnq gur Fuhuvgr naq Mbcune gur
Annznguvgr jrag, naq qvq nppbeqvat nf gur YBEQ pbzznaqrq gurz: gur
YBEQ nyfb npprcgrq Wbo.

42:10 Naq gur YBEQ ghearq gur pncgvivgl bs Wbo, jura ur cenlrq sbe uvf
sevraqf: nyfb gur YBEQ tnir Wbo gjvpr nf zhpu nf ur unq orsber.

42:11 Gura pnzr gurer hagb uvz nyy uvf oerguera, naq nyy uvf fvfgref,
naq nyy gurl gung unq orra bs uvf npdhnvagnapr orsber, naq qvq rng
oernq jvgu uvz va uvf ubhfr: naq gurl orzbnarq uvz, naq pbzsbegrq uvz
bire nyy gur rivy gung gur YBEQ unq oebhtug hcba uvz: rirel zna nyfb
tnir uvz n cvrpr bs zbarl, naq rirel bar na rneevat bs tbyq.

42:12 Fb gur YBEQ oyrffrq gur ynggre raq bs Wbo zber guna uvf
ortvaavat: sbe ur unq sbhegrra gubhfnaq furrc, naq fvk gubhfnaq
pnzryf, naq n gubhfnaq lbxr bs bkra, naq n gubhfnaq fur nffrf.

42:13 Ur unq nyfb frira fbaf naq guerr qnhtugref.

42:14 Naq ur pnyyrq gur anzr bs gur svefg, Wrzvzn; naq gur anzr bs gur
frpbaq, Xrmvn; naq gur anzr bs gur guveq, Xrerauncchpu.

42:15 Naq va nyy gur ynaq jrer ab jbzra sbhaq fb snve nf gur qnhtugref
bs Wbo: naq gurve sngure tnir gurz vaurevgnapr nzbat gurve oerguera.

42:16 Nsgre guvf yvirq Wbo na uhaqerq naq sbegl lrnef, naq fnj uvf
fbaf, naq uvf fbaf' fbaf, rira sbhe trarengvbaf.

42:17 Fb Wbo qvrq, orvat byq naq shyy bs qnlf.




Gur Obbx bs Cfnyzf


1:1 Oyrffrq vf gur zna gung jnyxrgu abg va gur pbhafry bs gur hatbqyl,
abe fgnaqrgu va gur jnl bs fvaaref, abe fvggrgu va gur frng bs gur
fpbeashy.

1:2 Ohg uvf qryvtug vf va gur ynj bs gur YBEQ; naq va uvf ynj qbgu ur
zrqvgngr qnl naq avtug.

1:3 Naq ur funyy or yvxr n gerr cynagrq ol gur eviref bs jngre, gung
oevatrgu sbegu uvf sehvg va uvf frnfba; uvf yrns nyfb funyy abg
jvgure; naq jungfbrire ur qbrgu funyy cebfcre.

1:4 Gur hatbqyl ner abg fb: ohg ner yvxr gur punss juvpu gur jvaq
qevirgu njnl.

1:5 Gurersber gur hatbqyl funyy abg fgnaq va gur whqtzrag, abe fvaaref
va gur pbatertngvba bs gur evtugrbhf.

1:6 Sbe gur YBEQ xabjrgu gur jnl bs gur evtugrbhf: ohg gur jnl bs gur
hatbqyl funyy crevfu.



2:1 Jul qb gur urngura entr, naq gur crbcyr vzntvar n inva guvat?

2:2 Gur xvatf bs gur rnegu frg gurzfryirf, naq gur ehyref gnxr pbhafry
gbtrgure, ntnvafg gur YBEQ, naq ntnvafg uvf nabvagrq, fnlvat,

2:3 Yrg hf oernx gurve onaqf nfhaqre, naq pnfg njnl gurve pbeqf sebz
hf.

2:4 Ur gung fvggrgu va gur urniraf funyy ynhtu: gur YBEQ funyy unir
gurz va qrevfvba.

2:5 Gura funyy ur fcrnx hagb gurz va uvf jengu, naq irk gurz va uvf
fber qvfcyrnfher.

2:6 Lrg unir V frg zl xvat hcba zl ubyl uvyy bs Mvba.

2:7 V jvyy qrpyner gur qrperr: gur YBEQ ungu fnvq hagb zr, Gubh neg zl
Fba; guvf qnl unir V ortbggra gurr.

2:8 Nfx bs zr, naq V funyy tvir gurr gur urngura sbe guvar
vaurevgnapr, naq gur hggrezbfg cnegf bs gur rnegu sbe gul cbffrffvba.

2:9 Gubh funyg oernx gurz jvgu n ebq bs veba; gubh funyg qnfu gurz va
cvrprf yvxr n cbggre'f irffry.

2:10 Or jvfr abj gurersber, B lr xvatf: or vafgehpgrq, lr whqtrf bs
gur rnegu.

2:11 Freir gur YBEQ jvgu srne, naq erwbvpr jvgu gerzoyvat.

2:12 Xvff gur Fba, yrfg ur or natel, naq lr crevfu sebz gur jnl, jura
uvf jengu vf xvaqyrq ohg n yvggyr. Oyrffrq ner nyy gurl gung chg gurve
gehfg va uvz.



3:1 Ybeq, ubj ner gurl vapernfrq gung gebhoyr zr! znal ner gurl gung
evfr hc ntnvafg zr.

3:2 Znal gurer or juvpu fnl bs zl fbhy, Gurer vf ab uryc sbe uvz va
Tbq.

Frynu.

3:3 Ohg gubh, B YBEQ, neg n fuvryq sbe zr; zl tybel, naq gur yvsgre hc
bs zvar urnq.

3:4 V pevrq hagb gur YBEQ jvgu zl ibvpr, naq ur urneq zr bhg bs uvf
ubyl uvyy. Frynu.

3:5 V ynvq zr qbja naq fyrcg; V njnxrq; sbe gur YBEQ fhfgnvarq zr.

3:6 V jvyy abg or nsenvq bs gra gubhfnaqf bs crbcyr, gung unir frg
gurzfryirf ntnvafg zr ebhaq nobhg.

3:7 Nevfr, B YBEQ; fnir zr, B zl Tbq: sbe gubh unfg fzvggra nyy zvar
rarzvrf hcba gur purrx obar; gubh unfg oebxra gur grrgu bs gur
hatbqyl.

3:8 Fnyingvba orybatrgu hagb gur YBEQ: gul oyrffvat vf hcba gul
crbcyr.

Frynu.



4:1 Urne zr jura V pnyy, B Tbq bs zl evtugrbhfarff: gubh unfg raynetrq
zr jura V jnf va qvfgerff; unir zrepl hcba zr, naq urne zl cenlre.

4:2 B lr fbaf bs zra, ubj ybat jvyy lr ghea zl tybel vagb funzr? ubj
ybat jvyy lr ybir inavgl, naq frrx nsgre yrnfvat? Frynu.

4:3 Ohg xabj gung gur YBEQ ungu frg ncneg uvz gung vf tbqyl sbe
uvzfrys: gur YBEQ jvyy urne jura V pnyy hagb uvz.

4:4 Fgnaq va njr, naq fva abg: pbzzhar jvgu lbhe bja urneg hcba lbhe
orq, naq or fgvyy. Frynu.

4:5 Bssre gur fnpevsvprf bs evtugrbhfarff, naq chg lbhe gehfg va gur
YBEQ.

4:6 Gurer or znal gung fnl, Jub jvyy furj hf nal tbbq? YBEQ, yvsg gubh
hc gur yvtug bs gul pbhagranapr hcba hf.

4:7 Gubh unfg chg tynqarff va zl urneg, zber guna va gur gvzr gung
gurve pbea naq gurve jvar vapernfrq.

4:8 V jvyy obgu ynl zr qbja va crnpr, naq fyrrc: sbe gubh, YBEQ, bayl
znxrfg zr qjryy va fnsrgl.



5:1 Tvir rne gb zl jbeqf, B YBEQ, pbafvqre zl zrqvgngvba.

5:2 Urnexra hagb gur ibvpr bs zl pel, zl Xvat, naq zl Tbq: sbe hagb
gurr jvyy V cenl.

5:3 Zl ibvpr funyg gubh urne va gur zbeavat, B YBEQ; va gur zbeavat
jvyy V qverpg zl cenlre hagb gurr, naq jvyy ybbx hc.

5:4 Sbe gubh neg abg n Tbq gung ungu cyrnfher va jvpxrqarff: arvgure
funyy rivy qjryy jvgu gurr.

5:5 Gur sbbyvfu funyy abg fgnaq va gul fvtug: gubh ungrfg nyy jbexref
bs vavdhvgl.

5:6 Gubh funyg qrfgebl gurz gung fcrnx yrnfvat: gur YBEQ jvyy noube
gur oybbql naq qrprvgshy zna.

5:7 Ohg nf sbe zr, V jvyy pbzr vagb gul ubhfr va gur zhygvghqr bs gul
zrepl: naq va gul srne jvyy V jbefuvc gbjneq gul ubyl grzcyr.

5:8 Yrnq zr, B YBEQ, va gul evtugrbhfarff orpnhfr bs zvar rarzvrf;
znxr gul jnl fgenvtug orsber zl snpr.

5:9 Sbe gurer vf ab snvgushyarff va gurve zbhgu; gurve vajneq cneg vf
irel jvpxrqarff; gurve guebng vf na bcra frchypuer; gurl synggre jvgu
gurve gbathr.

5:10 Qrfgebl gubh gurz, B Tbq; yrg gurz snyy ol gurve bja pbhafryf;
pnfg gurz bhg va gur zhygvghqr bs gurve genafterffvbaf; sbe gurl unir
eroryyrq ntnvafg gurr.

5:11 Ohg yrg nyy gubfr gung chg gurve gehfg va gurr erwbvpr: yrg gurz
rire fubhg sbe wbl, orpnhfr gubh qrsraqrfg gurz: yrg gurz nyfb gung
ybir gul anzr or wblshy va gurr.

5:12 Sbe gubh, YBEQ, jvyg oyrff gur evtugrbhf; jvgu snibhe jvyg gubh
pbzcnff uvz nf jvgu n fuvryq.



6:1 B YBEQ, erohxr zr abg va guvar natre, arvgure punfgra zr va gul
ubg qvfcyrnfher.

6:2 Unir zrepl hcba zr, B YBEQ; sbe V nz jrnx: B YBEQ, urny zr; sbe zl
obarf ner irkrq.

6:3 Zl fbhy vf nyfb fber irkrq: ohg gubh, B YBEQ, ubj ybat?

6:4 Erghea, B YBEQ, qryvire zl fbhy: bu fnir zr sbe gul zrepvrf' fnxr.

6:5 Sbe va qrngu gurer vf ab erzrzoenapr bs gurr: va gur tenir jub
funyy tvir gurr gunaxf?

6:6 V nz jrnel jvgu zl tebnavat; nyy gur avtug znxr V zl orq gb fjvz;
V jngre zl pbhpu jvgu zl grnef.

6:7 Zvar rlr vf pbafhzrq orpnhfr bs tevrs; vg jnkrgu byq orpnhfr bs
nyy zvar rarzvrf.

6:8 Qrcneg sebz zr, nyy lr jbexref bs vavdhvgl; sbe gur YBEQ ungu
urneq gur ibvpr bs zl jrrcvat.

6:9 Gur YBEQ ungu urneq zl fhccyvpngvba; gur YBEQ jvyy erprvir zl
cenlre.

6:10 Yrg nyy zvar rarzvrf or nfunzrq naq fber irkrq: yrg gurz erghea
naq or nfunzrq fhqqrayl.



7:1 B YBEQ zl Tbq, va gurr qb V chg zl gehfg: fnir zr sebz nyy gurz
gung crefrphgr zr, naq qryvire zr:

7:2 Yrfg ur grne zl fbhy yvxr n yvba, eraqvat vg va cvrprf, juvyr
gurer vf abar gb qryvire.

7:3 B YBEQ zl Tbq, Vs V unir qbar guvf; vs gurer or vavdhvgl va zl
unaqf;

7:4 Vs V unir erjneqrq rivy hagb uvz gung jnf ng crnpr jvgu zr; (lrn,
V unir qryvirerq uvz gung jvgubhg pnhfr vf zvar rarzl:)

7:5 Yrg gur rarzl crefrphgr zl fbhy, naq gnxr vg; lrn, yrg uvz gernq
qbja zl yvsr hcba gur rnegu, naq ynl zvar ubabhe va gur qhfg. Frynu.

7:6 Nevfr, B YBEQ, va guvar natre, yvsg hc gulfrys orpnhfr bs gur entr
bs zvar rarzvrf: naq njnxr sbe zr gb gur whqtzrag gung gubh unfg
pbzznaqrq.

7:7 Fb funyy gur pbatertngvba bs gur crbcyr pbzcnff gurr nobhg: sbe
gurve fnxrf gurersber erghea gubh ba uvtu.

7:8 Gur YBEQ funyy whqtr gur crbcyr: whqtr zr, B YBEQ, nppbeqvat gb zl
evtugrbhfarff, naq nppbeqvat gb zvar vagrtevgl gung vf va zr.

7:9 Bu yrg gur jvpxrqarff bs gur jvpxrq pbzr gb na raq; ohg rfgnoyvfu
gur whfg: sbe gur evtugrbhf Tbq gevrgu gur urnegf naq ervaf.

7:10 Zl qrsrapr vf bs Tbq, juvpu fnirgu gur hcevtug va urneg.

7:11 Tbq whqtrgu gur evtugrbhf, naq Tbq vf natel jvgu gur jvpxrq rirel
qnl.

7:12 Vs ur ghea abg, ur jvyy jurg uvf fjbeq; ur ungu orag uvf obj, naq
znqr vg ernql.

7:13 Ur ungu nyfb cercnerq sbe uvz gur vafgehzragf bs qrngu; ur
beqnvargu uvf neebjf ntnvafg gur crefrphgbef.

7:14 Orubyq, ur geninvyrgu jvgu vavdhvgl, naq ungu pbaprvirq zvfpuvrs,
naq oebhtug sbegu snyfrubbq.

7:15 Ur znqr n cvg, naq qvttrq vg, naq vf snyyra vagb gur qvgpu juvpu
ur znqr.

7:16 Uvf zvfpuvrs funyy erghea hcba uvf bja urnq, naq uvf ivbyrag
qrnyvat funyy pbzr qbja hcba uvf bja cngr.

7:17 V jvyy cenvfr gur YBEQ nppbeqvat gb uvf evtugrbhfarff: naq jvyy
fvat cenvfr gb gur anzr bs gur YBEQ zbfg uvtu.



8:1 B YBEQ, bhe Ybeq, ubj rkpryyrag vf gul anzr va nyy gur rnegu! jub
unfg frg gul tybel nobir gur urniraf.

8:2 Bhg bs gur zbhgu bs onorf naq fhpxyvatf unfg gubh beqnvarq
fgeratgu orpnhfr bs guvar rarzvrf, gung gubh zvtugrfg fgvyy gur rarzl
naq gur niratre.

8:3 Jura V pbafvqre gul urniraf, gur jbex bs gul svatref, gur zbba naq
gur fgnef, juvpu gubh unfg beqnvarq;

8:4 Jung vf zna, gung gubh neg zvaqshy bs uvz? naq gur fba bs zna,
gung gubh ivfvgrfg uvz?

8:5 Sbe gubh unfg znqr uvz n yvggyr ybjre guna gur natryf, naq unfg
pebjarq uvz jvgu tybel naq ubabhe.

8:6 Gubh znqrfg uvz gb unir qbzvavba bire gur jbexf bs gul unaqf; gubh
unfg chg nyy guvatf haqre uvf srrg:

8:7 Nyy furrc naq bkra, lrn, naq gur ornfgf bs gur svryq;

8:8 Gur sbjy bs gur nve, naq gur svfu bs gur frn, naq jungfbrire
cnffrgu guebhtu gur cnguf bs gur frnf.

8:9 B YBEQ bhe Ybeq, ubj rkpryyrag vf gul anzr va nyy gur rnegu!


9:1 V jvyy cenvfr gurr, B YBEQ, jvgu zl jubyr urneg; V jvyy furj sbegu
nyy gul zneiryybhf jbexf.

9:2 V jvyy or tynq naq erwbvpr va gurr: V jvyy fvat cenvfr gb gul
anzr, B gubh zbfg Uvtu.

9:3 Jura zvar rarzvrf ner ghearq onpx, gurl funyy snyy naq crevfu ng
gul cerfrapr.

9:4 Sbe gubh unfg znvagnvarq zl evtug naq zl pnhfr; gubh fngrfg va gur
guebar whqtvat evtug.

9:5 Gubh unfg erohxrq gur urngura, gubh unfg qrfgeblrq gur jvpxrq,
gubh unfg chg bhg gurve anzr sbe rire naq rire.

9:6 B gubh rarzl, qrfgehpgvbaf ner pbzr gb n crecrghny raq: naq gubh
unfg qrfgeblrq pvgvrf; gurve zrzbevny vf crevfurq jvgu gurz.

9:7 Ohg gur YBEQ funyy raqher sbe rire: ur ungu cercnerq uvf guebar
sbe whqtzrag.

9:8 Naq ur funyy whqtr gur jbeyq va evtugrbhfarff, ur funyy zvavfgre
whqtzrag gb gur crbcyr va hcevtugarff.

9:9 Gur YBEQ nyfb jvyy or n ershtr sbe gur bccerffrq, n ershtr va
gvzrf bs gebhoyr.

9:10 Naq gurl gung xabj gul anzr jvyy chg gurve gehfg va gurr: sbe
gubh, YBEQ, unfg abg sbefnxra gurz gung frrx gurr.

9:11 Fvat cenvfrf gb gur YBEQ, juvpu qjryyrgu va Mvba: qrpyner nzbat
gur crbcyr uvf qbvatf.

9:12 Jura ur znxrgu vadhvfvgvba sbe oybbq, ur erzrzorergu gurz: ur
sbetrggrgu abg gur pel bs gur uhzoyr.

9:13 Unir zrepl hcba zr, B YBEQ; pbafvqre zl gebhoyr juvpu V fhssre bs
gurz gung ungr zr, gubh gung yvsgrfg zr hc sebz gur tngrf bs qrngu:

9:14 Gung V znl furj sbegu nyy gul cenvfr va gur tngrf bs gur qnhtugre
bs Mvba: V jvyy erwbvpr va gul fnyingvba.

9:15 Gur urngura ner fhax qbja va gur cvg gung gurl znqr: va gur arg
juvpu gurl uvq vf gurve bja sbbg gnxra.

9:16 Gur YBEQ vf xabja ol gur whqtzrag juvpu ur rkrphgrgu: gur jvpxrq
vf fanerq va gur jbex bs uvf bja unaqf. Uvttnvba. Frynu.

9:17 Gur jvpxrq funyy or ghearq vagb uryy, naq nyy gur angvbaf gung
sbetrg Tbq.

9:18 Sbe gur arrql funyy abg nyjnl or sbetbggra: gur rkcrpgngvba bs
gur cbbe funyy abg crevfu sbe rire.

9:19 Nevfr, B YBEQ; yrg abg zna cerinvy: yrg gur urngura or whqtrq va
gul fvtug.

9:20 Chg gurz va srne, B YBEQ: gung gur angvbaf znl xabj gurzfryirf gb
or ohg zra. Frynu.



10:1 Jul fgnaqrfg gubh nsne bss, B YBEQ? jul uvqrfg gubh gulfrys va
gvzrf bs gebhoyr?

10:2 Gur jvpxrq va uvf cevqr qbgu crefrphgr gur cbbe: yrg gurz or
gnxra va gur qrivprf gung gurl unir vzntvarq.

10:3 Sbe gur jvpxrq obnfgrgu bs uvf urneg'f qrfver, naq oyrffrgu gur
pbirgbhf, jubz gur YBEQ noubeergu.

10:4 Gur jvpxrq, guebhtu gur cevqr bs uvf pbhagranapr, jvyy abg frrx
nsgre Tbq: Tbq vf abg va nyy uvf gubhtugf.

10:5 Uvf jnlf ner nyjnlf tevribhf; gul whqtzragf ner sne nobir bhg bs
uvf fvtug: nf sbe nyy uvf rarzvrf, ur chssrgu ng gurz.

10:6 Ur ungu fnvq va uvf urneg, V funyy abg or zbirq: sbe V funyy
arire or va nqirefvgl.

10:7 Uvf zbhgu vf shyy bs phefvat naq qrprvg naq senhq: haqre uvf
gbathr vf zvfpuvrs naq inavgl.

10:8 Ur fvggrgu va gur yhexvat cynprf bs gur ivyyntrf: va gur frperg
cynprf qbgu ur zheqre gur vaabprag: uvf rlrf ner cevivyl frg ntnvafg
gur cbbe.

10:9 Ur yvrgu va jnvg frpergyl nf n yvba va uvf qra: ur yvrgu va jnvg
gb pngpu gur cbbe: ur qbgu pngpu gur cbbe, jura ur qenjrgu uvz vagb
uvf arg.

10:10 Ur pebhpurgu, naq uhzoyrgu uvzfrys, gung gur cbbe znl snyy ol
uvf fgebat barf.

10:11 Ur ungu fnvq va uvf urneg, Tbq ungu sbetbggra: ur uvqrgu uvf
snpr; ur jvyy arire frr vg.

10:12 Nevfr, B YBEQ; B Tbq, yvsg hc guvar unaq: sbetrg abg gur uhzoyr.

10:13 Jurersber qbgu gur jvpxrq pbagrza Tbq? ur ungu fnvq va uvf
urneg, Gubh jvyg abg erdhver vg.

10:14 Gubh unfg frra vg; sbe gubh orubyqrfg zvfpuvrs naq fcvgr, gb
erdhvgr vg jvgu gul unaq: gur cbbe pbzzvggrgu uvzfrys hagb gurr; gubh
neg gur urycre bs gur sngureyrff.

10:15 Oernx gubh gur nez bs gur jvpxrq naq gur rivy zna: frrx bhg uvf
jvpxrqarff gvyy gubh svaq abar.

10:16 Gur YBEQ vf Xvat sbe rire naq rire: gur urngura ner crevfurq bhg
bs uvf ynaq.

10:17 YBEQ, gubh unfg urneq gur qrfver bs gur uhzoyr: gubh jvyg
cercner gurve urneg, gubh jvyg pnhfr guvar rne gb urne:

10:18 Gb whqtr gur sngureyrff naq gur bccerffrq, gung gur zna bs gur
rnegu znl ab zber bccerff.



11:1 Va gur YBEQ chg V zl gehfg: ubj fnl lr gb zl fbhy, Syrr nf n oveq
gb lbhe zbhagnva?

11:2 Sbe, yb, gur jvpxrq oraq gurve obj, gurl znxr ernql gurve neebj
hcba gur fgevat, gung gurl znl cevivyl fubbg ng gur hcevtug va urneg.

11:3 Vs gur sbhaqngvbaf or qrfgeblrq, jung pna gur evtugrbhf qb?

11:4 Gur YBEQ vf va uvf ubyl grzcyr, gur YBEQ'f guebar vf va urnira:
uvf rlrf orubyq, uvf rlryvqf gel, gur puvyqera bs zra.

11:5 Gur YBEQ gevrgu gur evtugrbhf: ohg gur jvpxrq naq uvz gung ybirgu
ivbyrapr uvf fbhy ungrgu.

11:6 Hcba gur jvpxrq ur funyy enva fanerf, sver naq oevzfgbar, naq na
ubeevoyr grzcrfg: guvf funyy or gur cbegvba bs gurve phc.

11:7 Sbe gur evtugrbhf YBEQ ybirgu evtugrbhfarff; uvf pbhagranapr qbgu
orubyq gur hcevtug.



12:1 Uryc, YBEQ; sbe gur tbqyl zna prnfrgu; sbe gur snvgushy snvy sebz
nzbat gur puvyqera bs zra.

12:2 Gurl fcrnx inavgl rirel bar jvgu uvf arvtuobhe: jvgu synggrevat
yvcf naq jvgu n qbhoyr urneg qb gurl fcrnx.

12:3 Gur YBEQ funyy phg bss nyy synggrevat yvcf, naq gur gbathr gung
fcrnxrgu cebhq guvatf:

12:4 Jub unir fnvq, Jvgu bhe gbathr jvyy jr cerinvy; bhe yvcf ner bhe
bja: jub vf ybeq bire hf?

12:5 Sbe gur bccerffvba bs gur cbbe, sbe gur fvtuvat bs gur arrql, abj
jvyy V nevfr, fnvgu gur YBEQ; V jvyy frg uvz va fnsrgl sebz uvz gung
chssrgu ng uvz.

12:6 Gur jbeqf bs gur YBEQ ner cher jbeqf: nf fvyire gevrq va n
sheanpr bs rnegu, chevsvrq frira gvzrf.

12:7 Gubh funyg xrrc gurz, B YBEQ, gubh funyg cerfreir gurz sebz guvf
trarengvba sbe rire.

12:8 Gur jvpxrq jnyx ba rirel fvqr, jura gur ivyrfg zra ner rknygrq.



13:1 Ubj ybat jvyg gubh sbetrg zr, B YBEQ? sbe rire? ubj ybat jvyg
gubh uvqr gul snpr sebz zr?

13:2 Ubj ybat funyy V gnxr pbhafry va zl fbhy, univat fbeebj va zl
urneg qnvyl? ubj ybat funyy zvar rarzl or rknygrq bire zr?

13:3 Pbafvqre naq urne zr, B YBEQ zl Tbq: yvtugra zvar rlrf, yrfg V
fyrrc gur fyrrc bs qrngu;

13:4 Yrfg zvar rarzl fnl, V unir cerinvyrq ntnvafg uvz; naq gubfr gung
gebhoyr zr erwbvpr jura V nz zbirq.

13:5 Ohg V unir gehfgrq va gul zrepl; zl urneg funyy erwbvpr va gul
fnyingvba.

13:6 V jvyy fvat hagb gur YBEQ, orpnhfr ur ungu qrnyg obhagvshyyl jvgu
zr.



14:1 Gur sbby ungu fnvq va uvf urneg, Gurer vf ab Tbq. Gurl ner
pbeehcg, gurl unir qbar nobzvanoyr jbexf, gurer vf abar gung qbrgu
tbbq.

14:2 Gur YBEQ ybbxrq qbja sebz urnira hcba gur puvyqera bs zra, gb frr
vs gurer jrer nal gung qvq haqrefgnaq, naq frrx Tbq.

14:3 Gurl ner nyy tbar nfvqr, gurl ner nyy gbtrgure orpbzr svygul:
gurer vf abar gung qbrgu tbbq, ab, abg bar.

14:4 Unir nyy gur jbexref bs vavdhvgl ab xabjyrqtr? jub rng hc zl
crbcyr nf gurl rng oernq, naq pnyy abg hcba gur YBEQ.

14:5 Gurer jrer gurl va terng srne: sbe Tbq vf va gur trarengvba bs
gur evtugrbhf.

14:6 Lr unir funzrq gur pbhafry bs gur cbbe, orpnhfr gur YBEQ vf uvf
ershtr.

14:7 Bu gung gur fnyingvba bs Vfenry jrer pbzr bhg bs Mvba! jura gur
YBEQ oevatrgu onpx gur pncgvivgl bs uvf crbcyr, Wnpbo funyy erwbvpr,
naq Vfenry funyy or tynq.



15:1 Ybeq, jub funyy novqr va gul gnoreanpyr? jub funyy qjryy va gul
ubyl uvyy?

15:2 Ur gung jnyxrgu hcevtugyl, naq jbexrgu evtugrbhfarff, naq
fcrnxrgu gur gehgu va uvf urneg.

15:3 Ur gung onpxovgrgu abg jvgu uvf gbathr, abe qbrgu rivy gb uvf
arvtuobhe, abe gnxrgu hc n ercebnpu ntnvafg uvf arvtuobhe.

15:4 Va jubfr rlrf n ivyr crefba vf pbagrzarq; ohg ur ubabhergu gurz
gung srne gur YBEQ. Ur gung fjrnergu gb uvf bja uheg, naq punatrgu
abg.

15:5 Ur gung chggrgu abg bhg uvf zbarl gb hfhel, abe gnxrgu erjneq
ntnvafg gur vaabprag. Ur gung qbrgu gurfr guvatf funyy arire or zbirq.



16:1 Cerfreir zr, B Tbq: sbe va gurr qb V chg zl gehfg.

16:2 B zl fbhy, gubh unfg fnvq hagb gur YBEQ, Gubh neg zl Ybeq: zl
tbbqarff rkgraqrgu abg gb gurr;

16:3 Ohg gb gur fnvagf gung ner va gur rnegu, naq gb gur rkpryyrag, va
jubz vf nyy zl qryvtug.

16:4 Gurve fbeebjf funyy or zhygvcyvrq gung unfgra nsgre nabgure tbq:
gurve qevax bssrevatf bs oybbq jvyy V abg bssre, abe gnxr hc gurve
anzrf vagb zl yvcf.

16:5 Gur YBEQ vf gur cbegvba bs zvar vaurevgnapr naq bs zl phc: gubh
znvagnvarfg zl ybg.

16:6 Gur yvarf ner snyyra hagb zr va cyrnfnag cynprf; lrn, V unir n
tbbqyl urevgntr.

16:7 V jvyy oyrff gur YBEQ, jub ungu tvira zr pbhafry: zl ervaf nyfb
vafgehpg zr va gur avtug frnfbaf.

16:8 V unir frg gur YBEQ nyjnlf orsber zr: orpnhfr ur vf ng zl evtug
unaq, V funyy abg or zbirq.

16:9 Gurersber zl urneg vf tynq, naq zl tybel erwbvprgu: zl syrfu nyfb
funyy erfg va ubcr.

16:10 Sbe gubh jvyg abg yrnir zl fbhy va uryy; arvgure jvyg gubh
fhssre guvar Ubyl Bar gb frr pbeehcgvba.

16:11 Gubh jvyg furj zr gur cngu bs yvsr: va gul cerfrapr vf shyarff
bs wbl; ng gul evtug unaq gurer ner cyrnfherf sbe rirezber.



17:1 Urne gur evtug, B YBEQ, nggraq hagb zl pel, tvir rne hagb zl
cenlre, gung tbrgu abg bhg bs srvtarq yvcf.

17:2 Yrg zl fragrapr pbzr sbegu sebz gul cerfrapr; yrg guvar rlrf
orubyq gur guvatf gung ner rdhny.

17:3 Gubh unfg cebirq zvar urneg; gubh unfg ivfvgrq zr va gur avtug;
gubh unfg gevrq zr, naq funyg svaq abguvat; V nz checbfrq gung zl
zbhgu funyy abg genafterff.

17:4 Pbapreavat gur jbexf bs zra, ol gur jbeq bs gul yvcf V unir xrcg
zr sebz gur cnguf bs gur qrfgeblre.

17:5 Ubyq hc zl tbvatf va gul cnguf, gung zl sbbgfgrcf fyvc abg.

17:6 V unir pnyyrq hcba gurr, sbe gubh jvyg urne zr, B Tbq: vapyvar
guvar rne hagb zr, naq urne zl fcrrpu.

17:7 Furj gul zneiryybhf ybivatxvaqarff, B gubh gung fnirfg ol gul
evtug unaq gurz juvpu chg gurve gehfg va gurr sebz gubfr gung evfr hc
ntnvafg gurz.

17:8 Xrrc zr nf gur nccyr bs gur rlr, uvqr zr haqre gur funqbj bs gul
jvatf,

17:9 Sebz gur jvpxrq gung bccerff zr, sebz zl qrnqyl rarzvrf, jub
pbzcnff zr nobhg.

17:10 Gurl ner vapybfrq va gurve bja sng: jvgu gurve zbhgu gurl fcrnx
cebhqyl.

17:11 Gurl unir abj pbzcnffrq hf va bhe fgrcf: gurl unir frg gurve
rlrf objvat qbja gb gur rnegu;

17:12 Yvxr nf n yvba gung vf terrql bs uvf cerl, naq nf vg jrer n
lbhat yvba yhexvat va frperg cynprf.

17:13 Nevfr, B YBEQ, qvfnccbvag uvz, pnfg uvz qbja: qryvire zl fbhy
sebz gur jvpxrq, juvpu vf gul fjbeq:

17:14 Sebz zra juvpu ner gul unaq, B YBEQ, sebz zra bs gur jbeyq,
juvpu unir gurve cbegvba va guvf yvsr, naq jubfr oryyl gubh svyyrfg
jvgu gul uvq gernfher: gurl ner shyy bs puvyqera, naq yrnir gur erfg
bs gurve fhofgnapr gb gurve onorf.

17:15 Nf sbe zr, V jvyy orubyq gul snpr va evtugrbhfarff: V funyy or
fngvfsvrq, jura V njnxr, jvgu gul yvxrarff.



18:1 V jvyy ybir gurr, B YBEQ, zl fgeratgu.

18:2 Gur YBEQ vf zl ebpx, naq zl sbegerff, naq zl qryvirere; zl Tbq,
zl fgeratgu, va jubz V jvyy gehfg; zl ohpxyre, naq gur ubea bs zl
fnyingvba, naq zl uvtu gbjre.

18:3 V jvyy pnyy hcba gur YBEQ, jub vf jbegul gb or cenvfrq: fb funyy
V or fnirq sebz zvar rarzvrf.

18:4 Gur fbeebjf bs qrngu pbzcnffrq zr, naq gur sybbqf bs hatbqyl zra
znqr zr nsenvq.

18:5 Gur fbeebjf bs uryy pbzcnffrq zr nobhg: gur fanerf bs qrngu
ceriragrq zr.

18:6 Va zl qvfgerff V pnyyrq hcba gur YBEQ, naq pevrq hagb zl Tbq: ur
urneq zl ibvpr bhg bs uvf grzcyr, naq zl pel pnzr orsber uvz, rira
vagb uvf rnef.

18:7 Gura gur rnegu fubbx naq gerzoyrq; gur sbhaqngvbaf nyfb bs gur
uvyyf zbirq naq jrer funxra, orpnhfr ur jnf jebgu.

18:8 Gurer jrag hc n fzbxr bhg bs uvf abfgevyf, naq sver bhg bs uvf
zbhgu qribherq: pbnyf jrer xvaqyrq ol vg.

18:9 Ur objrq gur urniraf nyfb, naq pnzr qbja: naq qnexarff jnf haqre
uvf srrg.

18:10 Naq ur ebqr hcba n pureho, naq qvq syl: lrn, ur qvq syl hcba gur
jvatf bs gur jvaq.

18:11 Ur znqr qnexarff uvf frperg cynpr; uvf cnivyvba ebhaq nobhg uvz
jrer qnex jngref naq guvpx pybhqf bs gur fxvrf.

18:12 Ng gur oevtugarff gung jnf orsber uvz uvf guvpx pybhqf cnffrq,
unvy fgbarf naq pbnyf bs sver.

18:13 Gur YBEQ nyfb guhaqrerq va gur urniraf, naq gur Uvturfg tnir uvf
ibvpr; unvy fgbarf naq pbnyf bs sver.

18:14 Lrn, ur frag bhg uvf neebjf, naq fpnggrerq gurz; naq ur fubg bhg
yvtugavatf, naq qvfpbzsvgrq gurz.

18:15 Gura gur punaaryf bs jngref jrer frra, naq gur sbhaqngvbaf bs
gur jbeyq jrer qvfpbirerq ng gul erohxr, B YBEQ, ng gur oynfg bs gur
oerngu bs gul abfgevyf.

18:16 Ur frag sebz nobir, ur gbbx zr, ur qerj zr bhg bs znal jngref.

18:17 Ur qryvirerq zr sebz zl fgebat rarzl, naq sebz gurz juvpu ungrq
zr: sbe gurl jrer gbb fgebat sbe zr.

18:18 Gurl ceriragrq zr va gur qnl bs zl pnynzvgl: ohg gur YBEQ jnf zl
fgnl.

18:19 Ur oebhtug zr sbegu nyfb vagb n ynetr cynpr; ur qryvirerq zr,
orpnhfr ur qryvtugrq va zr.

18:20 Gur YBEQ erjneqrq zr nppbeqvat gb zl evtugrbhfarff; nppbeqvat gb
gur pyrnaarff bs zl unaqf ungu ur erpbzcrafrq zr.

18:21 Sbe V unir xrcg gur jnlf bs gur YBEQ, naq unir abg jvpxrqyl
qrcnegrq sebz zl Tbq.

18:22 Sbe nyy uvf whqtzragf jrer orsber zr, naq V qvq abg chg njnl uvf
fgnghgrf sebz zr.

18:23 V jnf nyfb hcevtug orsber uvz, naq V xrcg zlfrys sebz zvar
vavdhvgl.

18:24 Gurersber ungu gur YBEQ erpbzcrafrq zr nppbeqvat gb zl
evtugrbhfarff, nppbeqvat gb gur pyrnaarff bs zl unaqf va uvf rlrfvtug.

18:25 Jvgu gur zrepvshy gubh jvyg furj gulfrys zrepvshy; jvgu na
hcevtug zna gubh jvyg furj gulfrys hcevtug;

18:26 Jvgu gur cher gubh jvyg furj gulfrys cher; naq jvgu gur sebjneq
gubh jvyg furj gulfrys sebjneq.

18:27 Sbe gubh jvyg fnir gur nssyvpgrq crbcyr; ohg jvyg oevat qbja
uvtu ybbxf.

18:28 Sbe gubh jvyg yvtug zl pnaqyr: gur YBEQ zl Tbq jvyy rayvtugra zl
qnexarff.

18:29 Sbe ol gurr V unir eha guebhtu n gebbc; naq ol zl Tbq unir V
yrncrq bire n jnyy.

18:30 Nf sbe Tbq, uvf jnl vf cresrpg: gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ vf gevrq:
ur vf n ohpxyre gb nyy gubfr gung gehfg va uvz.

18:31 Sbe jub vf Tbq fnir gur YBEQ? be jub vf n ebpx fnir bhe Tbq?

18:32 Vg vf Tbq gung tveqrgu zr jvgu fgeratgu, naq znxrgu zl jnl
cresrpg.

18:33 Ur znxrgu zl srrg yvxr uvaqf' srrg, naq frggrgu zr hcba zl uvtu
cynprf.

18:34 Ur grnpurgu zl unaqf gb jne, fb gung n obj bs fgrry vf oebxra ol
zvar nezf.

18:35 Gubh unfg nyfb tvira zr gur fuvryq bs gul fnyingvba: naq gul
evtug unaq ungu ubyqra zr hc, naq gul tragyrarff ungu znqr zr terng.

18:36 Gubh unfg raynetrq zl fgrcf haqre zr, gung zl srrg qvq abg fyvc.

18:37 V unir chefhrq zvar rarzvrf, naq biregnxra gurz: arvgure qvq V
ghea ntnva gvyy gurl jrer pbafhzrq.

18:38 V unir jbhaqrq gurz gung gurl jrer abg noyr gb evfr: gurl ner
snyyra haqre zl srrg.

18:39 Sbe gubh unfg tveqrq zr jvgu fgeratgu hagb gur onggyr: gubh unfg
fhoqhrq haqre zr gubfr gung ebfr hc ntnvafg zr.

18:40 Gubh unfg nyfb tvira zr gur arpxf bs zvar rarzvrf; gung V zvtug
qrfgebl gurz gung ungr zr.

18:41 Gurl pevrq, ohg gurer jnf abar gb fnir gurz: rira hagb gur YBEQ,
ohg ur nafjrerq gurz abg.

18:42 Gura qvq V orng gurz fznyy nf gur qhfg orsber gur jvaq: V qvq
pnfg gurz bhg nf gur qveg va gur fgerrgf.

18:43 Gubh unfg qryvirerq zr sebz gur fgevivatf bs gur crbcyr; naq
gubh unfg znqr zr gur urnq bs gur urngura: n crbcyr jubz V unir abg
xabja funyy freir zr.

18:44 Nf fbba nf gurl urne bs zr, gurl funyy borl zr: gur fgenatref
funyy fhozvg gurzfryirf hagb zr.

18:45 Gur fgenatref funyy snqr njnl, naq or nsenvq bhg bs gurve pybfr
cynprf.

18:46 Gur YBEQ yvirgu; naq oyrffrq or zl ebpx; naq yrg gur Tbq bs zl
fnyingvba or rknygrq.

18:47 Vg vf Tbq gung niratrgu zr, naq fhoqhrgu gur crbcyr haqre zr.

18:48 Ur qryvirergu zr sebz zvar rarzvrf: lrn, gubh yvsgrfg zr hc
nobir gubfr gung evfr hc ntnvafg zr: gubh unfg qryvirerq zr sebz gur
ivbyrag zna.

18:49 Gurersber jvyy V tvir gunaxf hagb gurr, B YBEQ, nzbat gur
urngura, naq fvat cenvfrf hagb gul anzr.

18:50 Terng qryvirenapr tvirgu ur gb uvf xvat; naq furjrgu zrepl gb
uvf nabvagrq, gb Qnivq, naq gb uvf frrq sbe rirezber.



19:1 Gur urniraf qrpyner gur tybel bs Tbq; naq gur sveznzrag furjrgu
uvf unaqljbex.

19:2 Qnl hagb qnl hggrergu fcrrpu, naq avtug hagb avtug furjrgu
xabjyrqtr.

19:3 Gurer vf ab fcrrpu abe ynathntr, jurer gurve ibvpr vf abg urneq.

19:4 Gurve yvar vf tbar bhg guebhtu nyy gur rnegu, naq gurve jbeqf gb
gur raq bs gur jbeyq. Va gurz ungu ur frg n gnoreanpyr sbe gur fha,

19:5 Juvpu vf nf n oevqrtebbz pbzvat bhg bs uvf punzore, naq erwbvprgu
nf n fgebat zna gb eha n enpr.

19:6 Uvf tbvat sbegu vf sebz gur raq bs gur urnira, naq uvf pvephvg
hagb gur raqf bs vg: naq gurer vf abguvat uvq sebz gur urng gurerbs.

19:7 Gur ynj bs gur YBEQ vf cresrpg, pbairegvat gur fbhy: gur
grfgvzbal bs gur YBEQ vf fher, znxvat jvfr gur fvzcyr.

19:8 Gur fgnghgrf bs gur YBEQ ner evtug, erwbvpvat gur urneg: gur
pbzznaqzrag bs gur YBEQ vf cher, rayvtugravat gur rlrf.

19:9 Gur srne bs gur YBEQ vf pyrna, raqhevat sbe rire: gur whqtzragf
bs gur YBEQ ner gehr naq evtugrbhf nygbtrgure.

19:10 Zber gb or qrfverq ner gurl guna tbyq, lrn, guna zhpu svar tbyq:
fjrrgre nyfb guna ubarl naq gur ubarlpbzo.

19:11 Zberbire ol gurz vf gul freinag jnearq: naq va xrrcvat bs gurz
gurer vf terng erjneq.

19:12 Jub pna haqrefgnaq uvf reebef? pyrnafr gubh zr sebz frperg
snhygf.

19:13 Xrrc onpx gul freinag nyfb sebz cerfhzcghbhf fvaf; yrg gurz abg
unir qbzvavba bire zr: gura funyy V or hcevtug, naq V funyy or
vaabprag sebz gur terng genafterffvba.

19:14 Yrg gur jbeqf bs zl zbhgu, naq gur zrqvgngvba bs zl urneg, or
npprcgnoyr va gul fvtug, B YBEQ, zl fgeratgu, naq zl erqrrzre.



20:1 Gur YBEQ urne gurr va gur qnl bs gebhoyr; gur anzr bs gur Tbq bs
Wnpbo qrsraq gurr;

20:2 Fraq gurr uryc sebz gur fnapghnel, naq fgeratgura gurr bhg bs
Mvba;

20:3 Erzrzore nyy gul bssrevatf, naq npprcg gul oheag fnpevsvpr;
Frynu.

20:4 Tenag gurr nppbeqvat gb guvar bja urneg, naq shysvy nyy gul
pbhafry.

20:5 Jr jvyy erwbvpr va gul fnyingvba, naq va gur anzr bs bhe Tbq jr
jvyy frg hc bhe onaaref: gur YBEQ shysvy nyy gul crgvgvbaf.

20:6 Abj xabj V gung gur YBEQ fnirgu uvf nabvagrq; ur jvyy urne uvz
sebz uvf ubyl urnira jvgu gur fnivat fgeratgu bs uvf evtug unaq.

20:7 Fbzr gehfg va punevbgf, naq fbzr va ubefrf: ohg jr jvyy erzrzore
gur anzr bs gur YBEQ bhe Tbq.

20:8 Gurl ner oebhtug qbja naq snyyra: ohg jr ner evfra, naq fgnaq
hcevtug.

20:9 Fnir, YBEQ: yrg gur xvat urne hf jura jr pnyy.



21:1 Gur xvat funyy wbl va gul fgeratgu, B YBEQ; naq va gul fnyingvba
ubj terngyl funyy ur erwbvpr!

21:2 Gubh unfg tvira uvz uvf urneg'f qrfver, naq unfg abg jvguubyqra
gur erdhrfg bs uvf yvcf. Frynu.

21:3 Sbe gubh ceriragrfg uvz jvgu gur oyrffvatf bs tbbqarff: gubh
frggrfg n pebja bs cher tbyq ba uvf urnq.

21:4 Ur nfxrq yvsr bs gurr, naq gubh tnirfg vg uvz, rira yratgu bs
qnlf sbe rire naq rire.

21:5 Uvf tybel vf terng va gul fnyingvba: ubabhe naq znwrfgl unfg gubh
ynvq hcba uvz.

21:6 Sbe gubh unfg znqr uvz zbfg oyrffrq sbe rire: gubh unfg znqr uvz
rkprrqvat tynq jvgu gul pbhagranapr.

21:7 Sbe gur xvat gehfgrgu va gur YBEQ, naq guebhtu gur zrepl bs gur
zbfg Uvtu ur funyy abg or zbirq.

21:8 Guvar unaq funyy svaq bhg nyy guvar rarzvrf: gul evtug unaq funyy
svaq bhg gubfr gung ungr gurr.

21:9 Gubh funyg znxr gurz nf n svrel bira va gur gvzr bs guvar natre:
gur YBEQ funyy fjnyybj gurz hc va uvf jengu, naq gur sver funyy qribhe
gurz.

21:10 Gurve sehvg funyg gubh qrfgebl sebz gur rnegu, naq gurve frrq
sebz nzbat gur puvyqera bs zra.

21:11 Sbe gurl vagraqrq rivy ntnvafg gurr: gurl vzntvarq n zvfpuvribhf
qrivpr, juvpu gurl ner abg noyr gb cresbez.

21:12 Gurersber funyg gubh znxr gurz ghea gurve onpx, jura gubh funyg
znxr ernql guvar neebjf hcba gul fgevatf ntnvafg gur snpr bs gurz.

21:13 Or gubh rknygrq, YBEQ, va guvar bja fgeratgu: fb jvyy jr fvat
naq cenvfr gul cbjre.



22:1 Zl Tbq, zl Tbq, jul unfg gubh sbefnxra zr? jul neg gubh fb sne
sebz urycvat zr, naq sebz gur jbeqf bs zl ebnevat?

22:2 B zl Tbq, V pel va gur qnl gvzr, ohg gubh urnerfg abg; naq va gur
avtug frnfba, naq nz abg fvyrag.

22:3 Ohg gubh neg ubyl, B gubh gung vaunovgrfg gur cenvfrf bs Vfenry.

22:4 Bhe snguref gehfgrq va gurr: gurl gehfgrq, naq gubh qvqfg qryvire
gurz.

22:5 Gurl pevrq hagb gurr, naq jrer qryvirerq: gurl gehfgrq va gurr,
naq jrer abg pbasbhaqrq.

22:6 Ohg V nz n jbez, naq ab zna; n ercebnpu bs zra, naq qrfcvfrq bs
gur crbcyr.

22:7 Nyy gurl gung frr zr ynhtu zr gb fpbea: gurl fubbg bhg gur yvc,
gurl funxr gur urnq, fnlvat,

22:8 Ur gehfgrq ba gur YBEQ gung ur jbhyq qryvire uvz: yrg uvz qryvire
uvz, frrvat ur qryvtugrq va uvz.

22:9 Ohg gubh neg ur gung gbbx zr bhg bs gur jbzo: gubh qvqfg znxr zr
ubcr jura V jnf hcba zl zbgure'f oernfgf.

22:10 V jnf pnfg hcba gurr sebz gur jbzo: gubh neg zl Tbq sebz zl
zbgure'f oryyl.

22:11 Or abg sne sebz zr; sbe gebhoyr vf arne; sbe gurer vf abar gb
uryc.

22:12 Znal ohyyf unir pbzcnffrq zr: fgebat ohyyf bs Onfuna unir orfrg
zr ebhaq.

22:13 Gurl tncrq hcba zr jvgu gurve zbhguf, nf n eniravat naq n
ebnevat yvba.

22:14 V nz cbherq bhg yvxr jngre, naq nyy zl obarf ner bhg bs wbvag:
zl urneg vf yvxr jnk; vg vf zrygrq va gur zvqfg bs zl objryf.

22:15 Zl fgeratgu vf qevrq hc yvxr n cbgfureq; naq zl gbathr pyrnirgu
gb zl wnjf; naq gubh unfg oebhtug zr vagb gur qhfg bs qrngu.

22:16 Sbe qbtf unir pbzcnffrq zr: gur nffrzoyl bs gur jvpxrq unir
vapybfrq zr: gurl cvreprq zl unaqf naq zl srrg.

22:17 V znl gryy nyy zl obarf: gurl ybbx naq fgner hcba zr.

22:18 Gurl cneg zl tnezragf nzbat gurz, naq pnfg ybgf hcba zl irfgher.

22:19 Ohg or abg gubh sne sebz zr, B YBEQ: B zl fgeratgu, unfgr gurr
gb uryc zr.

22:20 Qryvire zl fbhy sebz gur fjbeq; zl qneyvat sebz gur cbjre bs gur
qbt.

22:21 Fnir zr sebz gur yvba'f zbhgu: sbe gubh unfg urneq zr sebz gur
ubeaf bs gur havpbeaf.

22:22 V jvyy qrpyner gul anzr hagb zl oerguera: va gur zvqfg bs gur
pbatertngvba jvyy V cenvfr gurr.

22:23 Lr gung srne gur YBEQ, cenvfr uvz; nyy lr gur frrq bs Wnpbo,
tybevsl uvz; naq srne uvz, nyy lr gur frrq bs Vfenry.

22:24 Sbe ur ungu abg qrfcvfrq abe noubeerq gur nssyvpgvba bs gur
nssyvpgrq; arvgure ungu ur uvq uvf snpr sebz uvz; ohg jura ur pevrq
hagb uvz, ur urneq.

22:25 Zl cenvfr funyy or bs gurr va gur terng pbatertngvba: V jvyy cnl
zl ibjf orsber gurz gung srne uvz.

22:26 Gur zrrx funyy rng naq or fngvfsvrq: gurl funyy cenvfr gur YBEQ
gung frrx uvz: lbhe urneg funyy yvir sbe rire.

22:27 Nyy gur raqf bs gur jbeyq funyy erzrzore naq ghea hagb gur YBEQ:
naq nyy gur xvaqerqf bs gur angvbaf funyy jbefuvc orsber gurr.

22:28 Sbe gur xvatqbz vf gur YBEQ'f: naq ur vf gur tbireabe nzbat gur
angvbaf.

22:29 Nyy gurl gung or sng hcba rnegu funyy rng naq jbefuvc: nyy gurl
gung tb qbja gb gur qhfg funyy obj orsber uvz: naq abar pna xrrc nyvir
uvf bja fbhy.

22:30 N frrq funyy freir uvz; vg funyy or nppbhagrq gb gur Ybeq sbe n
trarengvba.

22:31 Gurl funyy pbzr, naq funyy qrpyner uvf evtugrbhfarff hagb n
crbcyr gung funyy or obea, gung ur ungu qbar guvf.



23:1 Gur YBEQ vf zl furcureq; V funyy abg jnag.

23:2 Ur znxrgu zr gb yvr qbja va terra cnfgherf: ur yrnqrgu zr orfvqr
gur fgvyy jngref.

23:3 Ur erfgbergu zl fbhy: ur yrnqrgu zr va gur cnguf bs evtugrbhfarff
sbe uvf anzr'f fnxr.

23:4 Lrn, gubhtu V jnyx guebhtu gur inyyrl bs gur funqbj bs qrngu, V
jvyy srne ab rivy: sbe gubh neg jvgu zr; gul ebq naq gul fgnss gurl
pbzsbeg zr.

23:5 Gubh cercnerfg n gnoyr orsber zr va gur cerfrapr bs zvar rarzvrf:
gubh nabvagrfg zl urnq jvgu bvy; zl phc ehaargu bire.

23:6 Fheryl tbbqarff naq zrepl funyy sbyybj zr nyy gur qnlf bs zl
yvsr: naq V jvyy qjryy va gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ sbe rire.



24:1 Gur rnegu vf gur YBEQ'f, naq gur shyarff gurerbs; gur jbeyq, naq
gurl gung qjryy gurerva.

24:2 Sbe ur ungu sbhaqrq vg hcba gur frnf, naq rfgnoyvfurq vg hcba gur
sybbqf.

24:3 Jub funyy nfpraq vagb gur uvyy bs gur YBEQ? be jub funyy fgnaq va
uvf ubyl cynpr?

24:4 Ur gung ungu pyrna unaqf, naq n cher urneg; jub ungu abg yvsgrq
hc uvf fbhy hagb inavgl, abe fjbea qrprvgshyyl.

24:5 Ur funyy erprvir gur oyrffvat sebz gur YBEQ, naq evtugrbhfarff
sebz gur Tbq bs uvf fnyingvba.

24:6 Guvf vf gur trarengvba bs gurz gung frrx uvz, gung frrx gul snpr,
B Wnpbo. Frynu.

24:7 Yvsg hc lbhe urnqf, B lr tngrf; naq or lr yvsg hc, lr rireynfgvat
qbbef; naq gur Xvat bs tybel funyy pbzr va.

24:8 Jub vf guvf Xvat bs tybel? Gur YBEQ fgebat naq zvtugl, gur YBEQ
zvtugl va onggyr.

24:9 Yvsg hc lbhe urnqf, B lr tngrf; rira yvsg gurz hc, lr rireynfgvat
qbbef; naq gur Xvat bs tybel funyy pbzr va.

24:10 Jub vf guvf Xvat bs tybel? Gur YBEQ bs ubfgf, ur vf gur Xvat bs
tybel. Frynu.



25:1 Hagb gurr, B YBEQ, qb V yvsg hc zl fbhy.

25:2 B zl Tbq, V gehfg va gurr: yrg zr abg or nfunzrq, yrg abg zvar
rarzvrf gevhzcu bire zr.

25:3 Lrn, yrg abar gung jnvg ba gurr or nfunzrq: yrg gurz or nfunzrq
juvpu genafterff jvgubhg pnhfr.

25:4 Furj zr gul jnlf, B YBEQ; grnpu zr gul cnguf.

25:5 Yrnq zr va gul gehgu, naq grnpu zr: sbe gubh neg gur Tbq bs zl
fnyingvba; ba gurr qb V jnvg nyy gur qnl.

25:6 Erzrzore, B YBEQ, gul graqre zrepvrf naq gul ybivatxvaqarffrf;
sbe gurl unir orra rire bs byq.

25:7 Erzrzore abg gur fvaf bs zl lbhgu, abe zl genafterffvbaf:
nppbeqvat gb gul zrepl erzrzore gubh zr sbe gul tbbqarff' fnxr, B
YBEQ.

25:8 Tbbq naq hcevtug vf gur YBEQ: gurersber jvyy ur grnpu fvaaref va
gur jnl.

25:9 Gur zrrx jvyy ur thvqr va whqtzrag: naq gur zrrx jvyy ur grnpu
uvf jnl.

25:10 Nyy gur cnguf bs gur YBEQ ner zrepl naq gehgu hagb fhpu nf xrrc
uvf pbiranag naq uvf grfgvzbavrf.

25:11 Sbe gul anzr'f fnxr, B YBEQ, cneqba zvar vavdhvgl; sbe vg vf
terng.

25:12 Jung zna vf ur gung srnergu gur YBEQ? uvz funyy ur grnpu va gur
jnl gung ur funyy pubbfr.

25:13 Uvf fbhy funyy qjryy ng rnfr; naq uvf frrq funyy vaurevg gur
rnegu.

25:14 Gur frperg bs gur YBEQ vf jvgu gurz gung srne uvz; naq ur jvyy
furj gurz uvf pbiranag.

25:15 Zvar rlrf ner rire gbjneq gur YBEQ; sbe ur funyy cyhpx zl srrg
bhg bs gur arg.

25:16 Ghea gurr hagb zr, naq unir zrepl hcba zr; sbe V nz qrfbyngr naq
nssyvpgrq.

25:17 Gur gebhoyrf bs zl urneg ner raynetrq: B oevat gubh zr bhg bs zl
qvfgerffrf.

25:18 Ybbx hcba zvar nssyvpgvba naq zl cnva; naq sbetvir nyy zl fvaf.

25:19 Pbafvqre zvar rarzvrf; sbe gurl ner znal; naq gurl ungr zr jvgu
pehry ungerq.

25:20 B xrrc zl fbhy, naq qryvire zr: yrg zr abg or nfunzrq; sbe V chg
zl gehfg va gurr.

25:21 Yrg vagrtevgl naq hcevtugarff cerfreir zr; sbe V jnvg ba gurr.

25:22 Erqrrz Vfenry, B Tbq, bhg bs nyy uvf gebhoyrf.



26:1 Whqtr zr, B YBEQ; sbe V unir jnyxrq va zvar vagrtevgl: V unir
gehfgrq nyfb va gur YBEQ; gurersber V funyy abg fyvqr.

26:2 Rknzvar zr, B YBEQ, naq cebir zr; gel zl ervaf naq zl urneg.

26:3 Sbe gul ybivatxvaqarff vf orsber zvar rlrf: naq V unir jnyxrq va
gul gehgu.

26:4 V unir abg fng jvgu inva crefbaf, arvgure jvyy V tb va jvgu
qvffrzoyref.

26:5 V unir ungrq gur pbatertngvba bs rivy qbref; naq jvyy abg fvg
jvgu gur jvpxrq.

26:6 V jvyy jnfu zvar unaqf va vaabprapl: fb jvyy V pbzcnff guvar
nygne, B YBEQ:

26:7 Gung V znl choyvfu jvgu gur ibvpr bs gunaxftvivat, naq gryy bs
nyy gul jbaqebhf jbexf.

26:8 YBEQ, V unir ybirq gur unovgngvba bs gul ubhfr, naq gur cynpr
jurer guvar ubabhe qjryyrgu.

26:9 Tngure abg zl fbhy jvgu fvaaref, abe zl yvsr jvgu oybbql zra:

26:10 Va jubfr unaqf vf zvfpuvrs, naq gurve evtug unaq vf shyy bs
oevorf.

26:11 Ohg nf sbe zr, V jvyy jnyx va zvar vagrtevgl: erqrrz zr, naq or
zrepvshy hagb zr.

26:12 Zl sbbg fgnaqrgu va na rira cynpr: va gur pbatertngvbaf jvyy V
oyrff gur YBEQ.



27:1 Gur YBEQ vf zl yvtug naq zl fnyingvba; jubz funyy V srne? gur
YBEQ vf gur fgeratgu bs zl yvsr; bs jubz funyy V or nsenvq?

27:2 Jura gur jvpxrq, rira zvar rarzvrf naq zl sbrf, pnzr hcba zr gb
rng hc zl syrfu, gurl fghzoyrq naq sryy.

27:3 Gubhtu na ubfg fubhyq rapnzc ntnvafg zr, zl urneg funyy abg srne:
gubhtu jne fubhyq evfr ntnvafg zr, va guvf jvyy V or pbasvqrag.

27:4 Bar guvat unir V qrfverq bs gur YBEQ, gung jvyy V frrx nsgre;
gung V znl qjryy va gur ubhfr bs gur YBEQ nyy gur qnlf bs zl yvsr, gb
orubyq gur ornhgl bs gur YBEQ, naq gb radhver va uvf grzcyr.

27:5 Sbe va gur gvzr bs gebhoyr ur funyy uvqr zr va uvf cnivyvba: va
gur frperg bs uvf gnoreanpyr funyy ur uvqr zr; ur funyy frg zr hc hcba
n ebpx.

27:6 Naq abj funyy zvar urnq or yvsgrq hc nobir zvar rarzvrf ebhaq
nobhg zr: gurersber jvyy V bssre va uvf gnoreanpyr fnpevsvprf bs wbl;
V jvyy fvat, lrn, V jvyy fvat cenvfrf hagb gur YBEQ.

27:7 Urne, B YBEQ, jura V pel jvgu zl ibvpr: unir zrepl nyfb hcba zr,
naq nafjre zr.

27:8 Jura gubh fnvqfg, Frrx lr zl snpr; zl urneg fnvq hagb gurr, Gul
snpr, YBEQ, jvyy V frrx.

27:9 Uvqr abg gul snpr sne sebz zr; chg abg gul freinag njnl va natre:
gubh unfg orra zl uryc; yrnir zr abg, arvgure sbefnxr zr, B Tbq bs zl
fnyingvba.

27:10 Jura zl sngure naq zl zbgure sbefnxr zr, gura gur YBEQ jvyy gnxr
zr hc.

27:11 Grnpu zr gul jnl, B YBEQ, naq yrnq zr va n cynva cngu, orpnhfr
bs zvar rarzvrf.

27:12 Qryvire zr abg bire hagb gur jvyy bs zvar rarzvrf: sbe snyfr
jvgarffrf ner evfra hc ntnvafg zr, naq fhpu nf oerngur bhg pehrygl.

27:13 V unq snvagrq, hayrff V unq oryvrirq gb frr gur tbbqarff bs gur
YBEQ va gur ynaq bs gur yvivat.

27:14 Jnvg ba gur YBEQ: or bs tbbq pbhentr, naq ur funyy fgeratgura
guvar urneg: jnvg, V fnl, ba gur YBEQ.



28:1 Hagb gurr jvyy V pel, B YBEQ zl ebpx; or abg fvyrag gb zr: yrfg,
vs gubh or fvyrag gb zr, V orpbzr yvxr gurz gung tb qbja vagb gur cvg.

28:2 Urne gur ibvpr bs zl fhccyvpngvbaf, jura V pel hagb gurr, jura V
yvsg hc zl unaqf gbjneq gul ubyl benpyr.

28:3 Qenj zr abg njnl jvgu gur jvpxrq, naq jvgu gur jbexref bs
vavdhvgl, juvpu fcrnx crnpr gb gurve arvtuobhef, ohg zvfpuvrs vf va
gurve urnegf.

28:4 Tvir gurz nppbeqvat gb gurve qrrqf, naq nppbeqvat gb gur
jvpxrqarff bs gurve raqrnibhef: tvir gurz nsgre gur jbex bs gurve
unaqf; eraqre gb gurz gurve qrfreg.

28:5 Orpnhfr gurl ertneq abg gur jbexf bs gur YBEQ, abe gur bcrengvba
bs uvf unaqf, ur funyy qrfgebl gurz, naq abg ohvyq gurz hc.

28:6 Oyrffrq or gur YBEQ, orpnhfr ur ungu urneq gur ibvpr bs zl
fhccyvpngvbaf.

28:7 Gur YBEQ vf zl fgeratgu naq zl fuvryq; zl urneg gehfgrq va uvz,
naq V nz urycrq: gurersber zl urneg terngyl erwbvprgu; naq jvgu zl
fbat jvyy V cenvfr uvz.

28:8 Gur YBEQ vf gurve fgeratgu, naq ur vf gur fnivat fgeratgu bs uvf
nabvagrq.

28:9 Fnir gul crbcyr, naq oyrff guvar vaurevgnapr: srrq gurz nyfb, naq
yvsg gurz hc sbe rire.



29:1 Tvir hagb gur YBEQ, B lr zvtugl, tvir hagb gur YBEQ tybel naq
fgeratgu.

29:2 Tvir hagb gur YBEQ gur tybel qhr hagb uvf anzr; jbefuvc gur YBEQ
va gur ornhgl bs ubyvarff.

29:3 Gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ vf hcba gur jngref: gur Tbq bs tybel
guhaqrergu: gur YBEQ vf hcba znal jngref.

29:4 Gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ vf cbjreshy; gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ vf shyy
bs znwrfgl.

29:5 Gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ oernxrgu gur prqnef; lrn, gur YBEQ oernxrgu
gur prqnef bs Yronaba.

29:6 Ur znxrgu gurz nyfb gb fxvc yvxr n pnys; Yronaba naq Fvevba yvxr
n lbhat havpbea.

29:7 Gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ qvivqrgu gur synzrf bs sver.

29:8 Gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ funxrgu gur jvyqrearff; gur YBEQ funxrgu
gur jvyqrearff bs Xnqrfu.

29:9 Gur ibvpr bs gur YBEQ znxrgu gur uvaqf gb pnyir, naq qvfpbirergu
gur sberfgf: naq va uvf grzcyr qbgu rirel bar fcrnx bs uvf tybel.

29:10 Gur YBEQ fvggrgu hcba gur sybbq; lrn, gur YBEQ fvggrgu Xvat sbe
rire.

29:11 Gur YBEQ jvyy tvir fgeratgu hagb uvf crbcyr; gur YBEQ jvyy oyrff
uvf crbcyr jvgu crnpr.



30:1 V jvyy rkgby gurr, B YBEQ; sbe gubh unfg yvsgrq zr hc, naq unfg
abg znqr zl sbrf gb erwbvpr bire zr.

30:2 B YBEQ zl Tbq, V pevrq hagb gurr, naq gubh unfg urnyrq zr.

30:3 B YBEQ, gubh unfg oebhtug hc zl fbhy sebz gur tenir: gubh unfg
xrcg zr nyvir, gung V fubhyq abg tb qbja gb gur cvg.

30:4 Fvat hagb gur YBEQ, B lr fnvagf bs uvf, naq tvir gunaxf ng gur
erzrzoenapr bs uvf ubyvarff.

30:5 Sbe uvf natre raqhergu ohg n zbzrag; va uvf snibhe vf yvsr:
jrrcvat znl raqher sbe n avtug, ohg wbl pbzrgu va gur zbeavat.

30:6 Naq va zl cebfcrevgl V fnvq, V funyy arire or zbirq.

30:7 YBEQ, ol gul snibhe gubh unfg znqr zl zbhagnva gb fgnaq fgebat:
gubh qvqfg uvqr gul snpr, naq V jnf gebhoyrq.

30:8 V pevrq gb gurr, B YBEQ; naq hagb gur YBEQ V znqr fhccyvpngvba.

30:9 Jung cebsvg vf gurer va zl oybbq, jura V tb qbja gb gur cvg?
Funyy gur qhfg cenvfr gurr? funyy vg qrpyner gul gehgu?

30:10 Urne, B YBEQ, naq unir zrepl hcba zr: YBEQ, or gubh zl urycre.

30:11 Gubh unfg ghearq sbe zr zl zbheavat vagb qnapvat: gubh unfg chg
bss zl fnpxpybgu, naq tveqrq zr jvgu tynqarff;

30:12 Gb gur raq gung zl tybel znl fvat cenvfr gb gurr, naq abg or
fvyrag.

B YBEQ zl Tbq, V jvyy tvir gunaxf hagb gurr sbe rire.



31:1 Va gurr, B YBEQ, qb V chg zl gehfg; yrg zr arire or nfunzrq:
qryvire zr va gul evtugrbhfarff.

31:2 Obj qbja guvar rne gb zr; qryvire zr fcrrqvyl: or gubh zl fgebat
ebpx, sbe na ubhfr bs qrsrapr gb fnir zr.

31:3 Sbe gubh neg zl ebpx naq zl sbegerff; gurersber sbe gul anzr'f
fnxr yrnq zr, naq thvqr zr.

31:4 Chyy zr bhg bs gur arg gung gurl unir ynvq cevivyl sbe zr: sbe
gubh neg zl fgeratgu.

31:5 Vagb guvar unaq V pbzzvg zl fcvevg: gubh unfg erqrrzrq zr, B YBEQ
Tbq bs gehgu.

31:6 V unir ungrq gurz gung ertneq ylvat inavgvrf: ohg V gehfg va gur
YBEQ.

31:7 V jvyy or tynq naq erwbvpr va gul zrepl: sbe gubh unfg pbafvqrerq
zl gebhoyr; gubh unfg xabja zl fbhy va nqirefvgvrf;

31:8 Naq unfg abg fuhg zr hc vagb gur unaq bs gur rarzl: gubh unfg frg
zl srrg va n ynetr ebbz.

31:9 Unir zrepl hcba zr, B YBEQ, sbe V nz va gebhoyr: zvar rlr vf
pbafhzrq jvgu tevrs, lrn, zl fbhy naq zl oryyl.

31:10 Sbe zl yvsr vf fcrag jvgu tevrs, naq zl lrnef jvgu fvtuvat: zl
fgeratgu snvyrgu orpnhfr bs zvar vavdhvgl, naq zl obarf ner pbafhzrq.

31:11 V jnf n ercebnpu nzbat nyy zvar rarzvrf, ohg rfcrpvnyyl nzbat zl
arvtuobhef, naq n srne gb zvar npdhnvagnapr: gurl gung qvq frr zr
jvgubhg syrq sebz zr.

31:12 V nz sbetbggra nf n qrnq zna bhg bs zvaq: V nz yvxr n oebxra
irffry.

31:13 Sbe V unir urneq gur fynaqre bs znal: srne jnf ba rirel fvqr:
juvyr gurl gbbx pbhafry gbtrgure ntnvafg zr, gurl qrivfrq gb gnxr njnl
zl yvsr.

31:14 Ohg V gehfgrq va gurr, B YBEQ: V fnvq, Gubh neg zl Tbq.

31:15 Zl gvzrf ner va gul unaq: qryvire zr sebz gur unaq bs zvar
rarzvrf, naq sebz gurz gung crefrphgr zr.

31:16 Znxr gul snpr gb fuvar hcba gul freinag: fnir zr sbe gul
zrepvrf' fnxr.

31:17 Yrg zr abg or nfunzrq, B YBEQ; sbe V unir pnyyrq hcba gurr: yrg
gur jvpxrq or nfunzrq, naq yrg gurz or fvyrag va gur tenir.

31:18 Yrg gur ylvat yvcf or chg gb fvyrapr; juvpu fcrnx tevribhf
guvatf cebhqyl naq pbagrzcghbhfyl ntnvafg gur evtugrbhf.

31:19 Bu ubj terng vf gul tbbqarff, juvpu gubh unfg ynvq hc sbe gurz
gung srne gurr; juvpu gubh unfg jebhtug sbe gurz gung gehfg va gurr
orsber gur fbaf bs zra!

31:20 Gubh funyg uvqr gurz va gur frperg bs gul cerfrapr sebz gur
cevqr bs zna: gubh funyg xrrc gurz frpergyl va n cnivyvba sebz gur
fgevsr bs gbathrf.

31:21 Oyrffrq or gur YBEQ: sbe ur ungu furjrq zr uvf zneiryybhf
xvaqarff va n fgebat pvgl.

31:22 Sbe V fnvq va zl unfgr, V nz phg bss sebz orsber guvar rlrf:
arireguryrff gubh urneqrfg gur ibvpr bs zl fhccyvpngvbaf jura V pevrq
hagb gurr.

31:23 B ybir gur YBEQ, nyy lr uvf fnvagf: sbe gur YBEQ cerfreirgu gur
snvgushy, naq cyragvshyyl erjneqrgu gur cebhq qbre.

31:24 Or bs tbbq pbhentr, naq ur funyy fgeratgura lbhe urneg, nyy lr
gung ubcr va gur YBEQ.



32:1 Oyrffrq vf ur jubfr genafterffvba vf sbetvira, jubfr fva vf
pbirerq.

32:2 Oyrffrq vf gur zna hagb jubz gur YBEQ vzchgrgu abg vavdhvgl, naq
va jubfr fcvevg gurer vf ab thvyr.

32:3 Jura V xrcg fvyrapr, zl obarf jnkrq byq guebhtu zl ebnevat nyy
gur qnl ybat.

32:4 Sbe qnl naq avtug gul unaq jnf urnil hcba zr: zl zbvfgher vf
ghearq vagb gur qebhtug bs fhzzre. Frynu.

32:5 V npxabjyrqtr zl fva hagb gurr, naq zvar vavdhvgl unir V abg uvq.
V fnvq, V jvyy pbasrff zl genafterffvbaf hagb gur YBEQ; naq gubh
sbetnirfg gur vavdhvgl bs zl fva. Frynu.

32:6 Sbe guvf funyy rirel bar gung vf tbqyl cenl hagb gurr va n gvzr
jura gubh znlrfg or sbhaq: fheryl va gur sybbqf bs terng jngref gurl
funyy abg pbzr avtu hagb uvz.

32:7 Gubh neg zl uvqvat cynpr; gubh funyg cerfreir zr sebz gebhoyr;
gubh funyg pbzcnff zr nobhg jvgu fbatf bs qryvirenapr. Frynu.

32:8 V jvyy vafgehpg gurr naq grnpu gurr va gur jnl juvpu gubh funyg
tb: V jvyy thvqr gurr jvgu zvar rlr.

32:9 Or lr abg nf gur ubefr, be nf gur zhyr, juvpu unir ab
haqrefgnaqvat: jubfr zbhgu zhfg or uryq va jvgu ovg naq oevqyr, yrfg
gurl pbzr arne hagb gurr.

32:10 Znal fbeebjf funyy or gb gur jvpxrq: ohg ur gung gehfgrgu va gur
YBEQ, zrepl funyy pbzcnff uvz nobhg.

32:11 Or tynq va gur YBEQ, naq erwbvpr, lr evtugrbhf: naq fubhg sbe
wbl, nyy lr gung ner hcevtug va urneg.



33:1 Erwbvpr va gur YBEQ, B lr evtugrbhf: sbe cenvfr vf pbzryl sbe gur
hcevtug.

33:2 Cenvfr gur YBEQ jvgu unec: fvat hagb uvz jvgu gur cfnygrel naq na
vafgehzrag bs gra fgevatf.

33:3 Fvat hagb uvz n arj fbat; cynl fxvyshyyl jvgu n ybhq abvfr.

33:4 Sbe gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ vf evtug; naq nyy uvf jbexf ner qbar va
gehgu.

33:5 Ur ybirgu evtugrbhfarff naq whqtzrag: gur rnegu vf shyy bs gur
tbbqarff bs gur YBEQ.

33:6 Ol gur jbeq bs gur YBEQ jrer gur urniraf znqr; naq nyy gur ubfg
bs gurz ol gur oerngu bs uvf zbhgu.

33:7 Ur tngurergu gur jngref bs gur frn gbtrgure nf na urnc: ur ynlrgu
hc gur qrcgu va fgberubhfrf.

33:8 Yrg nyy gur rnegu srne gur YBEQ: yrg nyy gur vaunovgnagf bs gur
jbeyq fgnaq va njr bs uvz.

33:9 Sbe ur fcnxr, naq vg jnf qbar; ur pbzznaqrq, naq vg fgbbq snfg.

33:10 Gur YBEQ oevatrgu gur pbhafry bs gur urngura gb abhtug: ur
znxrgu gur qrivprf bs gur crbcyr bs abar rssrpg.

33:11 Gur pbhafry bs gur YBEQ fgnaqrgu sbe rire, gur gubhtugf bs uvf
urneg gb nyy trarengvbaf.

33:12 Oyrffrq vf gur angvba jubfr Tbq vf gur YBEQ; naq gur crbcyr jubz
ur ungu pubfra sbe uvf bja vaurevgnapr.

33:13 Gur YBEQ ybbxrgu sebz urnira; ur orubyqrgu nyy gur fbaf bs zra.

33:14 Sebz gur cynpr bs uvf unovgngvba ur ybbxrgu hcba nyy gur
vaunovgnagf bs gur rnegu.

33:15 Ur snfuvbargu gurve urnegf nyvxr; ur pbafvqrergu nyy gurve
jbexf.

33:16 Gurer vf ab xvat fnirq ol gur zhygvghqr bs na ubfg: n zvtugl zna
vf abg qryvirerq ol zhpu fgeratgu.

33:17 Na ubefr vf n inva guvat sbe fnsrgl: arvgure funyy ur qryvire
nal ol uvf terng fgeratgu.

33:18 Orubyq, gur rlr bs gur YBEQ vf hcba gurz gung srne uvz, hcba
gurz gung ubcr va uvf zrepl;

33:19 Gb qryvire gurve fbhy sebz qrngu, naq gb xrrc gurz nyvir va
snzvar.

33:20 Bhe fbhy jnvgrgu sbe gur YBEQ: ur vf bhe uryc naq bhe fuvryq.

33:21 Sbe bhe urneg funyy erwbvpr va uvz, orpnhfr jr unir gehfgrq va
uvf ubyl anzr.

33:22 Yrg gul zrepl, B YBEQ, or hcba hf, nppbeqvat nf jr ubcr va gurr.



34:1 V jvyy oyrff gur YBEQ ng nyy gvzrf: uvf cenvfr funyy pbagvahnyyl
or va zl zbhgu.

34:2 Zl fbhy funyy znxr ure obnfg va gur YBEQ: gur uhzoyr funyy urne
gurerbs, naq or tynq.

34:3 B zntavsl gur YBEQ jvgu zr, naq yrg hf rknyg uvf anzr gbtrgure.

34:4 V fbhtug gur YBEQ, naq ur urneq zr, naq qryvirerq zr sebz nyy zl
srnef.

34:5 Gurl ybbxrq hagb uvz, naq jrer yvtugrarq: naq gurve snprf jrer
abg nfunzrq.

34:6 Guvf cbbe zna pevrq, naq gur YBEQ urneq uvz, naq fnirq uvz bhg bs
nyy uvf gebhoyrf.

34:7 Gur natry bs gur YBEQ rapnzcrgu ebhaq nobhg gurz gung srne uvz,
naq qryvirergu gurz.

34:8 B gnfgr naq frr gung gur YBEQ vf tbbq: oyrffrq vf gur zna gung
gehfgrgu va uvz.

34:9 B srne gur YBEQ, lr uvf fnvagf: sbe gurer vf ab jnag gb gurz gung
srne uvz.

34:10 Gur lbhat yvbaf qb ynpx, naq fhssre uhatre: ohg gurl gung frrx
gur YBEQ funyy abg jnag nal tbbq guvat.

34:11 Pbzr, lr puvyqera, urnexra hagb zr: V jvyy grnpu lbh gur srne bs
gur YBEQ.

34:12 Jung zna vf ur gung qrfvergu yvsr, naq ybirgu znal qnlf, gung ur
znl frr tbbq?

34:13 Xrrc gul gbathr sebz rivy, naq gul yvcf sebz fcrnxvat thvyr.

34:14 Qrcneg sebz rivy, naq qb tbbq; frrx crnpr, naq chefhr vg.

34:15 Gur rlrf bs gur YBEQ ner hcba gur evtugrbhf, naq uvf rnef ner
bcra hagb gurve pel.

34:16 Gur snpr bs gur YBEQ vf ntnvafg gurz gung qb rivy, gb phg bss
gur erzrzoenapr bs gurz sebz gur rnegu.

34:17 Gur evtugrbhf pel, naq gur YBEQ urnergu, naq qryvirergu gurz bhg
bs nyy gurve gebhoyrf.

34:18 Gur YBEQ vf avtu hagb gurz gung ner bs n oebxra urneg; naq
fnirgu fhpu nf or bs n pbagevgr fcvevg.

34:19 Znal ner gur nssyvpgvbaf bs gur evtugrbhf: ohg gur YBEQ
qryvirergu uvz bhg bs gurz nyy.

34:20 Ur xrrcrgu nyy uvf obarf: abg bar bs gurz vf oebxra.

34:21 Rivy funyy fynl gur jvpxrq: naq gurl gung ungr gur evtugrbhf
funyy or qrfbyngr.

34:22 Gur YBEQ erqrrzrgu gur fbhy bs uvf freinagf: naq abar bs gurz
gung gehfg va uvz funyy or qrfbyngr.



35:1 Cyrnq zl pnhfr, B YBEQ, jvgu gurz gung fgevir jvgu zr: svtug
ntnvafg gurz gung svtug ntnvafg zr.

35:2 Gnxr ubyq bs fuvryq naq ohpxyre, naq fgnaq hc sbe zvar uryc.

35:3 Qenj bhg nyfb gur fcrne, naq fgbc gur jnl ntnvafg gurz gung
crefrphgr zr: fnl hagb zl fbhy, V nz gul fnyingvba.

35:4 Yrg gurz or pbasbhaqrq naq chg gb funzr gung frrx nsgre zl fbhy:
yrg gurz or ghearq onpx naq oebhtug gb pbashfvba gung qrivfr zl uheg.

35:5 Yrg gurz or nf punss orsber gur jvaq: naq yrg gur natry bs gur
YBEQ punfr gurz.

35:6 Yrg gurve jnl or qnex naq fyvccrel: naq yrg gur natry bs gur YBEQ
crefrphgr gurz.

35:7 Sbe jvgubhg pnhfr unir gurl uvq sbe zr gurve arg va n cvg, juvpu
jvgubhg pnhfr gurl unir qvttrq sbe zl fbhy.

35:8 Yrg qrfgehpgvba pbzr hcba uvz ng hanjnerf; naq yrg uvf arg gung
ur ungu uvq pngpu uvzfrys: vagb gung irel qrfgehpgvba yrg uvz snyy.

35:9 Naq zl fbhy funyy or wblshy va gur YBEQ: vg funyy erwbvpr va uvf
fnyingvba.

35:10 Nyy zl obarf funyy fnl, YBEQ, jub vf yvxr hagb gurr, juvpu
qryvirerfg gur cbbe sebz uvz gung vf gbb fgebat sbe uvz, lrn, gur cbbe
naq gur arrql sebz uvz gung fcbvyrgu uvz?

35:11 Snyfr jvgarffrf qvq evfr hc; gurl ynvq gb zl punetr guvatf gung
V xarj abg.

35:12 Gurl erjneqrq zr rivy sbe tbbq gb gur fcbvyvat bs zl fbhy.

35:13 Ohg nf sbe zr, jura gurl jrer fvpx, zl pybguvat jnf fnpxpybgu: V
uhzoyrq zl fbhy jvgu snfgvat; naq zl cenlre erghearq vagb zvar bja
obfbz.

35:14 V orunirq zlfrys nf gubhtu ur unq orra zl sevraq be oebgure: V
objrq qbja urnivyl, nf bar gung zbheargu sbe uvf zbgure.

35:15 Ohg va zvar nqirefvgl gurl erwbvprq, naq tngurerq gurzfryirf
gbtrgure: lrn, gur nowrpgf tngurerq gurzfryirf gbtrgure ntnvafg zr,
naq V xarj vg abg; gurl qvq grne zr, naq prnfrq abg:

35:16 Jvgu ulcbpevgvpny zbpxref va srnfgf, gurl tanfurq hcba zr jvgu
gurve grrgu.

35:17 Ybeq, ubj ybat jvyg gubh ybbx ba? erfphr zl fbhy sebz gurve
qrfgehpgvbaf, zl qneyvat sebz gur yvbaf.

35:18 V jvyy tvir gurr gunaxf va gur terng pbatertngvba: V jvyy cenvfr
gurr nzbat zhpu crbcyr.

35:19 Yrg abg gurz gung ner zvar rarzvrf jebatshyyl erwbvpr bire zr:
arvgure yrg gurz jvax jvgu gur rlr gung ungr zr jvgubhg n pnhfr.

35:20 Sbe gurl fcrnx abg crnpr: ohg gurl qrivfr qrprvgshy znggref
ntnvafg gurz gung ner dhvrg va gur ynaq.

35:21 Lrn, gurl bcrarq gurve zbhgu jvqr ntnvafg zr, naq fnvq, Nun,
nun, bhe rlr ungu frra vg.

35:22 Guvf gubh unfg frra, B YBEQ: xrrc abg fvyrapr: B Ybeq, or abg
sne sebz zr.

35:23 Fgve hc gulfrys, naq njnxr gb zl whqtzrag, rira hagb zl pnhfr,
zl Tbq naq zl Ybeq.

35:24 Whqtr zr, B YBEQ zl Tbq, nppbeqvat gb gul evtugrbhfarff; naq yrg
gurz abg erwbvpr bire zr.

35:25 Yrg gurz abg fnl va gurve urnegf, Nu, fb jbhyq jr unir vg: yrg
gurz abg fnl, Jr unir fjnyybjrq uvz hc.

35:26 Yrg gurz or nfunzrq naq oebhtug gb pbashfvba gbtrgure gung
erwbvpr ng zvar uheg: yrg gurz or pybgurq jvgu funzr naq qvfubabhe
gung zntavsl gurzfryirf ntnvafg zr.

35:27 Yrg gurz fubhg sbe wbl, naq or tynq, gung snibhe zl evtugrbhf
pnhfr: lrn, yrg gurz fnl pbagvahnyyl, Yrg gur YBEQ or zntavsvrq, juvpu
ungu cyrnfher va gur cebfcrevgl bs uvf freinag.

35:28 Naq zl gbathr funyy fcrnx bs gul evtugrbhfarff naq bs gul cenvfr
nyy gur qnl ybat.



36:1 Gur genafterffvba bs gur jvpxrq fnvgu jvguva zl urneg, gung gurer
vf ab srne bs Tbq orsber uvf rlrf.

36:2 Sbe ur synggrergu uvzfrys va uvf bja rlrf, hagvy uvf vavdhvgl or
sbhaq gb or ungrshy.

36:3 Gur jbeqf bs uvf zbhgu ner vavdhvgl naq qrprvg: ur ungu yrsg bss
gb or jvfr, naq gb qb tbbq.

36:4 Ur qrivfrgu zvfpuvrs hcba uvf orq; ur frggrgu uvzfrys va n jnl
gung vf abg tbbq; ur noubeergu abg rivy.

36:5 Gul zrepl, B YBEQ, vf va gur urniraf; naq gul snvgushyarff
ernpurgu hagb gur pybhqf.

36:6 Gul evtugrbhfarff vf yvxr gur terng zbhagnvaf; gul whqtzragf ner
n terng qrrc: B YBEQ, gubh cerfreirfg zna naq ornfg.

36:7 Ubj rkpryyrag vf gul ybivatxvaqarff, B Tbq! gurersber gur
puvyqera bs zra chg gurve gehfg haqre gur funqbj bs gul jvatf.

36:8 Gurl funyy or nohaqnagyl fngvfsvrq jvgu gur sngarff bs gul ubhfr;
naq gubh funyg znxr gurz qevax bs gur evire bs gul cyrnfherf.

36:9 Sbe jvgu gurr vf gur sbhagnva bs yvsr: va gul yvtug funyy jr frr
yvtug.

36:10 B pbagvahr gul ybivatxvaqarff hagb gurz gung xabj gurr; naq gul
evtugrbhfarff gb gur hcevtug va urneg.

36:11 Yrg abg gur sbbg bs cevqr pbzr ntnvafg zr, naq yrg abg gur unaq
bs gur jvpxrq erzbir zr.

36:12 Gurer ner gur jbexref bs vavdhvgl snyyra: gurl ner pnfg qbja,
naq funyy abg or noyr gb evfr.



37:1 Serg abg gulfrys orpnhfr bs rivyqbref, arvgure or gubh raivbhf
ntnvafg gur jbexref bs vavdhvgl.

37:2 Sbe gurl funyy fbba or phg qbja yvxr gur tenff, naq jvgure nf gur
terra ureo.

37:3 Gehfg va gur YBEQ, naq qb tbbq; fb funyg gubh qjryy va gur ynaq,
naq irevyl gubh funyg or srq.

37:4 Qryvtug gulfrys nyfb va gur YBEQ: naq ur funyy tvir gurr gur
qrfverf bs guvar urneg.

37:5 Pbzzvg gul jnl hagb gur YBEQ; gehfg nyfb va uvz; naq ur funyy
oevat vg gb cnff.

37:6 Naq ur funyy oevat sbegu gul evtugrbhfarff nf gur yvtug, naq gul
whqtzrag nf gur abbaqnl.

37:7 Erfg va gur YBEQ, naq jnvg cngvragyl sbe uvz: serg abg gulfrys
orpnhfr bs uvz jub cebfcrergu va uvf jnl, orpnhfr bs gur zna jub
oevatrgu jvpxrq qrivprf gb cnff.

37:8 Prnfr sebz natre, naq sbefnxr jengu: serg abg gulfrys va nal jvfr
gb qb rivy.

37:9 Sbe rivyqbref funyy or phg bss: ohg gubfr gung jnvg hcba gur
YBEQ, gurl funyy vaurevg gur rnegu.

37:10 Sbe lrg n yvggyr juvyr, naq gur jvpxrq funyy abg or: lrn, gubh
funyg qvyvtragyl pbafvqre uvf cynpr, naq vg funyy abg or.

37:11 Ohg gur zrrx funyy vaurevg gur rnegu; naq funyy qryvtug
gurzfryirf va gur nohaqnapr bs crnpr.

37:12 Gur jvpxrq cybggrgu ntnvafg gur whfg, naq tanfurgu hcba uvz jvgu
uvf grrgu.

37:13 Gur YBEQ funyy ynhtu ng uvz: sbe ur frrgu gung uvf qnl vf
pbzvat.

37:14 Gur jvpxrq unir qenja bhg gur fjbeq, naq unir orag gurve obj, gb
pnfg qbja gur cbbe naq arrql, naq gb fynl fhpu nf or bs hcevtug
pbairefngvba.

37:15 Gurve fjbeq funyy ragre vagb gurve bja urneg, naq gurve objf
funyy or oebxra.

37:16 N yvggyr gung n evtugrbhf zna ungu vf orggre guna gur evpurf bs
znal jvpxrq.

37:17 Sbe gur nezf bs gur jvpxrq funyy or oebxra: ohg gur YBEQ
hcubyqrgu gur evtugrbhf.

37:18 Gur YBEQ xabjrgu gur qnlf bs gur hcevtug: naq gurve vaurevgnapr
funyy or sbe rire.

37:19 Gurl funyy abg or nfunzrq va gur rivy gvzr: naq va gur qnlf bs
snzvar gurl funyy or fngvfsvrq.

37:20 Ohg gur jvpxrq funyy crevfu, naq gur rarzvrf bs gur YBEQ funyy
or nf gur sng bs ynzof: gurl funyy pbafhzr; vagb fzbxr funyy gurl
pbafhzr njnl.

37:21 Gur jvpxrq obeebjrgu, naq cnlrgu abg ntnva: ohg gur evtugrbhf
furjrgu zrepl, naq tvirgu.

37:22 Sbe fhpu nf or oyrffrq bs uvz funyy vaurevg gur rnegu; naq gurl
gung or phefrq bs uvz funyy or phg bss.

37:23 Gur fgrcf bs n tbbq zna ner beqrerq ol gur YBEQ: naq ur
qryvtugrgu va uvf jnl.

37:24 Gubhtu ur snyy, ur funyy abg or hggreyl pnfg qbja: sbe gur YBEQ
hcubyqrgu uvz jvgu uvf unaq.

37:25 V unir orra lbhat, naq abj nz byq; lrg unir V abg frra gur
evtugrbhf sbefnxra, abe uvf frrq orttvat oernq.

37:26 Ur vf rire zrepvshy, naq yraqrgu; naq uvf frrq vf oyrffrq.

37:27 Qrcneg sebz rivy, naq qb tbbq; naq qjryy sbe rirezber.

37:28 Sbe gur YBEQ ybirgu whqtzrag, naq sbefnxrgu abg uvf fnvagf; gurl
ner cerfreirq sbe rire: ohg gur frrq bs gur jvpxrq funyy or phg bss.

37:29 Gur evtugrbhf funyy vaurevg gur ynaq, naq qjryy gurerva sbe
rire.

37:30 Gur zbhgu bs gur evtugrbhf fcrnxrgu jvfqbz, naq uvf gbathr
gnyxrgu bs whqtzrag.

37:31 Gur ynj bs uvf Tbq vf va uvf urneg; abar bs uvf fgrcf funyy
fyvqr.

37:32 Gur jvpxrq jngpurgu gur evtugrbhf, naq frrxrgu gb fynl uvz.

37:33 Gur YBEQ jvyy abg yrnir uvz va uvf unaq, abe pbaqrza uvz jura ur
vf whqtrq.

37:34 Jnvg ba gur YBEQ, naq xrrc uvf jnl, naq ur funyy rknyg gurr gb
vaurevg gur ynaq: jura gur jvpxrq ner phg bss, gubh funyg frr vg.

37:35 V unir frra gur jvpxrq va terng cbjre, naq fcernqvat uvzfrys
yvxr n terra onl gerr.

37:36 Lrg ur cnffrq njnl, naq, yb, ur jnf abg: lrn, V fbhtug uvz, ohg
ur pbhyq abg or sbhaq.

37:37 Znex gur cresrpg zna, naq orubyq gur hcevtug: sbe gur raq bs
gung zna vf crnpr.

37:38 Ohg gur genafterffbef funyy or qrfgeblrq gbtrgure: gur raq bs
gur jvpxrq funyy or phg bss.

37:39 Ohg gur fnyingvba bs gur evtugrbhf vf bs gur YBEQ: ur vf gurve
fgeratgu va gur gvzr bs gebhoyr.

37:40 Naq gur YBEQ funyy uryc gurz, naq qryvire gurz: ur funyy qryvire
gurz sebz gur jvpxrq, naq fnir gurz, orpnhfr gurl gehfg va uvz.



38:1 B ybeq, erohxr zr abg va gul jengu: arvgure punfgra zr va gul ubg
qvfcyrnfher.

38:2 Sbe guvar neebjf fgvpx snfg va zr, naq gul unaq cerffrgu zr fber.

38:3 Gurer vf ab fbhaqarff va zl syrfu orpnhfr bs guvar natre; arvgure
vf gurer nal erfg va zl obarf orpnhfr bs zl fva.

38:4 Sbe zvar vavdhvgvrf ner tbar bire zvar urnq: nf na urnil oheqra
gurl ner gbb urnil sbe zr.

38:5 Zl jbhaqf fgvax naq ner pbeehcg orpnhfr bs zl sbbyvfuarff.

38:6 V nz gebhoyrq; V nz objrq qbja terngyl; V tb zbheavat nyy gur qnl
ybat.

38:7 Sbe zl ybvaf ner svyyrq jvgu n ybngufbzr qvfrnfr: naq gurer vf ab
fbhaqarff va zl syrfu.

38:8 V nz srroyr naq fber oebxra: V unir ebnerq ol ernfba bs gur
qvfdhvrgarff bs zl urneg.

38:9 Ybeq, nyy zl qrfver vf orsber gurr; naq zl tebnavat vf abg uvq
sebz gurr.

38:10 Zl urneg cnagrgu, zl fgeratgu snvyrgu zr: nf sbe gur yvtug bs
zvar rlrf, vg nyfb vf tbar sebz zr.

38:11 Zl ybiref naq zl sevraqf fgnaq nybbs sebz zl fber; naq zl
xvafzra fgnaq nsne bss.

38:12 Gurl nyfb gung frrx nsgre zl yvsr ynl fanerf sbe zr: naq gurl
gung frrx zl uheg fcrnx zvfpuvribhf guvatf, naq vzntvar qrprvgf nyy
gur qnl ybat.

38:13 Ohg V, nf n qrns zna, urneq abg; naq V jnf nf n qhzo zna gung
bcrargu abg uvf zbhgu.

38:14 Guhf V jnf nf n zna gung urnergu abg, naq va jubfr zbhgu ner ab
ercebbsf.

38:15 Sbe va gurr, B YBEQ, qb V ubcr: gubh jvyg urne, B Ybeq zl Tbq.

38:16 Sbe V fnvq, Urne zr, yrfg bgurejvfr gurl fubhyq erwbvpr bire zr:
jura zl sbbg fyvccrgu, gurl zntavsl gurzfryirf ntnvafg zr.

38:17 Sbe V nz ernql gb unyg, naq zl fbeebj vf pbagvahnyyl orsber zr.

38:18 Sbe V jvyy qrpyner zvar vavdhvgl; V jvyy or fbeel sbe zl fva.

38:19 Ohg zvar rarzvrf ner yviryl, naq gurl ner fgebat: naq gurl gung
ungr zr jebatshyyl ner zhygvcyvrq.

38:20 Gurl nyfb gung eraqre rivy sbe tbbq ner zvar nqirefnevrf;
orpnhfr V sbyybj gur guvat gung tbbq vf.

38:21 Sbefnxr zr abg, B YBEQ: B zl Tbq, or abg sne sebz zr.

38:22 Znxr unfgr gb uryc zr, B Ybeq zl fnyingvba.



39:1 V fnvq, V jvyy gnxr urrq gb zl jnlf, gung V fva abg jvgu zl
gbathr: V jvyy xrrc zl zbhgu jvgu n oevqyr, juvyr gur jvpxrq vf orsber
zr.

39:2 V jnf qhzo jvgu fvyrapr, V uryq zl crnpr, rira sebz tbbq; naq zl
fbeebj jnf fgveerq.

39:3 Zl urneg jnf ubg jvguva zr, juvyr V jnf zhfvat gur sver ohearq:
gura fcnxr V jvgu zl gbathr,

39:4 YBEQ, znxr zr gb xabj zvar raq, naq gur zrnfher bs zl qnlf, jung
vg vf: gung V znl xabj ubj senvy V nz.

39:5 Orubyq, gubh unfg znqr zl qnlf nf na unaqoernqgu; naq zvar ntr vf
nf abguvat orsber gurr: irevyl rirel zna ng uvf orfg fgngr vf
nygbtrgure inavgl.

Frynu.

39:6 Fheryl rirel zna jnyxrgu va n inva furj: fheryl gurl ner
qvfdhvrgrq va inva: ur urncrgu hc evpurf, naq xabjrgu abg jub funyy
tngure gurz.

39:7 Naq abj, Ybeq, jung jnvg V sbe? zl ubcr vf va gurr.

39:8 Qryvire zr sebz nyy zl genafterffvbaf: znxr zr abg gur ercebnpu
bs gur sbbyvfu.

39:9 V jnf qhzo, V bcrarq abg zl zbhgu; orpnhfr gubh qvqfg vg.

39:10 Erzbir gul fgebxr njnl sebz zr: V nz pbafhzrq ol gur oybj bs
guvar unaq.

39:11 Jura gubh jvgu erohxrf qbfg pbeerpg zna sbe vavdhvgl, gubh
znxrfg uvf ornhgl gb pbafhzr njnl yvxr n zbgu: fheryl rirel zna vf
inavgl. Frynu.

39:12 Urne zl cenlre, B YBEQ, naq tvir rne hagb zl pel; ubyq abg gul
crnpr ng zl grnef: sbe V nz n fgenatre jvgu gurr, naq n fbwbheare, nf
nyy zl snguref jrer.

39:13 B fcner zr, gung V znl erpbire fgeratgu, orsber V tb urapr, naq
or ab zber.



40:1 V jnvgrq cngvragyl sbe gur YBEQ; naq ur vapyvarq hagb zr, naq
urneq zl pel.

40:2 Ur oebhtug zr hc nyfb bhg bs na ubeevoyr cvg, bhg bs gur zvel
pynl, naq frg zl srrg hcba n ebpx, naq rfgnoyvfurq zl tbvatf.

40:3 Naq ur ungu chg n arj fbat va zl zbhgu, rira cenvfr hagb bhe Tbq:
znal funyy frr vg, naq srne, naq funyy gehfg va gur YBEQ.

40:4 Oyrffrq vf gung zna gung znxrgu gur YBEQ uvf gehfg, naq
erfcrpgrgu abg gur cebhq, abe fhpu nf ghea nfvqr gb yvrf.

40:5 Znal, B YBEQ zl Tbq, ner gul jbaqreshy jbexf juvpu gubh unfg
qbar, naq gul gubhtugf juvpu ner gb hf-jneq: gurl pnaabg or erpxbarq
hc va beqre hagb gurr: vs V jbhyq qrpyner naq fcrnx bs gurz, gurl ner
zber guna pna or ahzorerq.

40:6 Fnpevsvpr naq bssrevat gubh qvqfg abg qrfver; zvar rnef unfg gubh
bcrarq: oheag bssrevat naq fva bssrevat unfg gubh abg erdhverq.

40:7 Gura fnvq V, Yb, V pbzr: va gur ibyhzr bs gur obbx vg vf jevggra
bs zr,

40:8 V qryvtug gb qb gul jvyy, B zl Tbq: lrn, gul ynj vf jvguva zl
urneg.

40:9 V unir cernpurq evtugrbhfarff va gur terng pbatertngvba: yb, V
unir abg ersenvarq zl yvcf, B YBEQ, gubh xabjrfg.

40:10 V unir abg uvq gul evtugrbhfarff jvguva zl urneg; V unir
qrpynerq gul snvgushyarff naq gul fnyingvba: V unir abg pbaprnyrq gul
ybivatxvaqarff naq gul gehgu sebz gur terng pbatertngvba.

40:11 Jvguubyq abg gubh gul graqre zrepvrf sebz zr, B YBEQ: yrg gul
ybivatxvaqarff naq gul gehgu pbagvahnyyl cerfreir zr.

40:12 Sbe vaahzrenoyr rivyf unir pbzcnffrq zr nobhg: zvar vavdhvgvrf
unir gnxra ubyq hcba zr, fb gung V nz abg noyr gb ybbx hc; gurl ner
zber guna gur unvef bs zvar urnq: gurersber zl urneg snvyrgu zr.

40:13 Or cyrnfrq, B YBEQ, gb qryvire zr: B YBEQ, znxr unfgr gb uryc
zr.

40:14 Yrg gurz or nfunzrq naq pbasbhaqrq gbtrgure gung frrx nsgre zl
fbhy gb qrfgebl vg; yrg gurz or qevira onpxjneq naq chg gb funzr gung
jvfu zr rivy.

40:15 Yrg gurz or qrfbyngr sbe n erjneq bs gurve funzr gung fnl hagb
zr, Nun, nun.

40:16 Yrg nyy gubfr gung frrx gurr erwbvpr naq or tynq va gurr: yrg
fhpu nf ybir gul fnyingvba fnl pbagvahnyyl, Gur YBEQ or zntavsvrq.

40:17 Ohg V nz cbbe naq arrql; lrg gur Ybeq guvaxrgu hcba zr: gubh neg
zl uryc naq zl qryvirere; znxr ab gneelvat, B zl Tbq.



41:1 Oyrffrq vf ur gung pbafvqrergu gur cbbe: gur YBEQ jvyy qryvire
uvz va gvzr bs gebhoyr.

41:2 Gur YBEQ jvyy cerfreir uvz, naq xrrc uvz nyvir; naq ur funyy or
oyrffrq hcba gur rnegu: naq gubh jvyg abg qryvire uvz hagb gur jvyy bs
uvf rarzvrf.

41:3 Gur YBEQ jvyy fgeratgura uvz hcba gur orq bs ynathvfuvat: gubh
jvyg znxr nyy uvf orq va uvf fvpxarff.

41:4 V fnvq, YBEQ, or zrepvshy hagb zr: urny zl fbhy; sbe V unir
fvaarq ntnvafg gurr.

41:5 Zvar rarzvrf fcrnx rivy bs zr, Jura funyy ur qvr, naq uvf anzr
crevfu?

41:6 Naq vs ur pbzr gb frr zr, ur fcrnxrgu inavgl: uvf urneg tngurergu
vavdhvgl gb vgfrys; jura ur tbrgu noebnq, ur gryyrgu vg.

41:7 Nyy gung ungr zr juvfcre gbtrgure ntnvafg zr: ntnvafg zr qb gurl
qrivfr zl uheg.

41:8 Na rivy qvfrnfr, fnl gurl, pyrnirgu snfg hagb uvz: naq abj gung
ur yvrgu ur funyy evfr hc ab zber.

41:9 Lrn, zvar bja snzvyvne sevraq, va jubz V gehfgrq, juvpu qvq rng
bs zl oernq, ungu yvsgrq hc uvf urry ntnvafg zr.

41:10 Ohg gubh, B YBEQ, or zrepvshy hagb zr, naq envfr zr hc, gung V
znl erdhvgr gurz.

41:11 Ol guvf V xabj gung gubh snibherfg zr, orpnhfr zvar rarzl qbgu
abg gevhzcu bire zr.

41:12 Naq nf sbe zr, gubh hcubyqrfg zr va zvar vagrtevgl, naq frggrfg
zr orsber gul snpr sbe rire.

41:13 Oyrffrq or gur YBEQ Tbq bs Vfenry sebz rireynfgvat, naq gb
rireynfgvat. Nzra, naq Nzra.



42:1 Nf gur uneg cnagrgu nsgre gur jngre oebbxf, fb cnagrgu zl fbhy
nsgre gurr, B Tbq.

42:2 Zl fbhy guvefgrgu sbe Tbq, sbe gur yvivat Tbq: jura funyy V pbzr
naq nccrne orsber Tbq?

42:3 Zl grnef unir orra zl zrng qnl naq avtug, juvyr gurl pbagvahnyyl
fnl hagb zr, Jurer vf gul Tbq?

42:4 Jura V erzrzore gurfr guvatf, V cbhe bhg zl fbhy va zr: sbe V unq
tbar jvgu gur zhygvghqr, V jrag jvgu gurz gb gur ubhfr bs Tbq, jvgu
gur ibvpr bs wbl naq cenvfr, jvgu n zhygvghqr gung xrcg ubylqnl.

42:5 Jul neg gubh pnfg qbja, B zl fbhy? naq jul neg gubh qvfdhvrgrq va
zr?  ubcr gubh va Tbq: sbe V funyy lrg cenvfr uvz sbe gur uryc bs uvf
pbhagranapr.

42:6 B zl Tbq, zl fbhy vf pnfg qbja jvguva zr: gurersber jvyy V
erzrzore gurr sebz gur ynaq bs Wbeqna, naq bs gur Urezbavgrf, sebz gur
uvyy Zvmne.

42:7 Qrrc pnyyrgu hagb qrrc ng gur abvfr bs gul jngrefcbhgf: nyy gul
jnirf naq gul ovyybjf ner tbar bire zr.

42:8 Lrg gur YBEQ jvyy pbzznaq uvf ybivatxvaqarff va gur qnl gvzr, naq
va gur avtug uvf fbat funyy or jvgu zr, naq zl cenlre hagb gur Tbq bs
zl yvsr.

42:9 V jvyy fnl hagb Tbq zl ebpx, Jul unfg gubh sbetbggra zr? jul tb V
zbheavat orpnhfr bs gur bccerffvba bs gur rarzl?

42:10 Nf jvgu n fjbeq va zl obarf, zvar rarzvrf ercebnpu zr; juvyr
gurl fnl qnvyl hagb zr, Jurer vf gul Tbq?

42:11 Jul neg gubh pnfg qbja, B zl fbhy? naq jul neg gubh qvfdhvrgrq
jvguva zr? ubcr gubh va Tbq: sbe V funyy lrg cenvfr uvz, jub vf gur
urnygu bs zl pbhagranapr, naq zl Tbq.



43:1 Whqtr zr, B Tbq, naq cyrnq zl pnhfr ntnvafg na hatbqyl angvba: B
qryvire zr sebz gur qrprvgshy naq hawhfg zna.

43:2 Sbe gubh neg gur Tbq bs zl fgeratgu: jul qbfg gubh pnfg zr bss?
jul tb V zbheavat orpnhfr bs gur bccerffvba bs gur rarzl?

43:3 B fraq bhg gul yvtug naq gul gehgu: yrg gurz yrnq zr; yrg gurz
oevat zr hagb gul ubyl uvyy, naq gb gul gnoreanpyrf.

43:4 Gura jvyy V tb hagb gur nygne bs Tbq, hagb Tbq zl rkprrqvat wbl:
lrn, hcba gur unec jvyy V cenvfr gurr, B Tbq zl Tbq.

43:5 Jul neg gubh pnfg qbja, B zl fbhy? naq jul neg gubh qvfdhvrgrq
jvguva zr? ubcr va Tbq: sbe V funyy lrg cenvfr uvz, jub vf gur urnygu
bs zl pbhagranapr, naq zl Tbq.



44:1 Jr unir urneq jvgu bhe rnef, B Tbq, bhe snguref unir gbyq hf,
jung jbex gubh qvqfg va gurve qnlf, va gur gvzrf bs byq.

44:2 Ubj gubh qvqfg qevir bhg gur urngura jvgu gul unaq, naq cynagrqfg
gurz; ubj gubh qvqfg nssyvpg gur crbcyr, naq pnfg gurz bhg.

44:3 Sbe gurl tbg abg gur ynaq va cbffrffvba ol gurve bja fjbeq,
arvgure qvq gurve bja nez fnir gurz: ohg gul evtug unaq, naq guvar
nez, naq gur yvtug bs gul pbhagranapr, orpnhfr gubh unqfg n snibhe
hagb gurz.

44:4 Gubh neg zl Xvat, B Tbq: pbzznaq qryvirenaprf sbe Wnpbo.

44:5 Guebhtu gurr jvyy jr chfu qbja bhe rarzvrf: guebhtu gul anzr jvyy
jr gernq gurz haqre gung evfr hc ntnvafg hf.

44:6 Sbe V jvyy abg gehfg va zl obj, arvgure funyy zl fjbeq fnir zr.

44:7 Ohg gubh unfg fnirq hf sebz bhe rarzvrf, naq unfg chg gurz gb
funzr gung ungrq hf.

44:8 Va Tbq jr obnfg nyy gur qnl ybat, naq cenvfr gul anzr sbe rire.

Frynu.

44:9 Ohg gubh unfg pnfg bss, naq chg hf gb funzr; naq tbrfg abg sbegu
jvgu bhe nezvrf.

44:10 Gubh znxrfg hf gb ghea onpx sebz gur rarzl: naq gurl juvpu ungr
hf fcbvy sbe gurzfryirf.

44:11 Gubh unfg tvira hf yvxr furrc nccbvagrq sbe zrng; naq unfg
fpnggrerq hf nzbat gur urngura.

44:12 Gubh fryyrfg gul crbcyr sbe abhtug, naq qbfg abg vapernfr gul
jrnygu ol gurve cevpr.

44:13 Gubh znxrfg hf n ercebnpu gb bhe arvtuobhef, n fpbea naq n
qrevfvba gb gurz gung ner ebhaq nobhg hf.

44:14 Gubh znxrfg hf n oljbeq nzbat gur urngura, n funxvat bs gur urnq
nzbat gur crbcyr.

44:15 Zl pbashfvba vf pbagvahnyyl orsber zr, naq gur funzr bs zl snpr
ungu pbirerq zr,

44:16 Sbe gur ibvpr bs uvz gung ercebnpurgu naq oynfcurzrgu; ol ernfba
bs gur rarzl naq niratre.

44:17 Nyy guvf vf pbzr hcba hf; lrg unir jr abg sbetbggra gurr,
arvgure unir jr qrnyg snyfryl va gul pbiranag.

44:18 Bhe urneg vf abg ghearq onpx, arvgure unir bhe fgrcf qrpyvarq
sebz gul jnl;

44:19 Gubhtu gubh unfg fber oebxra hf va gur cynpr bs qentbaf, naq
pbirerq hf jvgu gur funqbj bs qrngu.

44:20 Vs jr unir sbetbggra gur anzr bs bhe Tbq, be fgergpurq bhg bhe
unaqf gb n fgenatr tbq;

44:21 Funyy abg Tbq frnepu guvf bhg? sbe ur xabjrgu gur frpergf bs gur
urneg.

44:22 Lrn, sbe gul fnxr ner jr xvyyrq nyy gur qnl ybat; jr ner pbhagrq
nf furrc sbe gur fynhtugre.

44:23 Njnxr, jul fyrrcrfg gubh, B Ybeq? nevfr, pnfg hf abg bss sbe
rire.

44:24 Jurersber uvqrfg gubh gul snpr, naq sbetrggrfg bhe nssyvpgvba
naq bhe bccerffvba?

44:25 Sbe bhe fbhy vf objrq qbja gb gur qhfg: bhe oryyl pyrnirgu hagb
gur rnegu.

44:26 Nevfr sbe bhe uryc, naq erqrrz hf sbe gul zrepvrf' fnxr.



45:1 Zl urneg vf vaqvgvat n tbbq znggre: V fcrnx bs gur guvatf juvpu V
unir znqr gbhpuvat gur xvat: zl gbathr vf gur cra bs n ernql jevgre.

45:2 Gubh neg snvere guna gur puvyqera bs zra: tenpr vf cbherq vagb
gul yvcf: gurersber Tbq ungu oyrffrq gurr sbe rire.

45:3 Tveq gul fjbeq hcba gul guvtu, B zbfg zvtugl, jvgu gul tybel naq
gul znwrfgl.

45:4 Naq va gul znwrfgl evqr cebfcrebhfyl orpnhfr bs gehgu naq
zrrxarff naq evtugrbhfarff; naq gul evtug unaq funyy grnpu gurr
greevoyr guvatf.

45:5 Guvar neebjf ner funec va gur urneg bs gur xvat'f rarzvrf;
jurerol gur crbcyr snyy haqre gurr.

45:6 Gul guebar, B Tbq, vf sbe rire naq rire: gur fprcger bs gul
xvatqbz vf n evtug fprcger.

45:7 Gubh ybirfg evtugrbhfarff, naq ungrfg jvpxrqarff: gurersber Tbq,
gul Tbq, ungu nabvagrq gurr jvgu gur bvy bs tynqarff nobir gul
sryybjf.

45:8 Nyy gul tnezragf fzryy bs zleeu, naq nybrf, naq pnffvn, bhg bs
gur vibel cnynprf, jurerol gurl unir znqr gurr tynq.

45:9 Xvatf' qnhtugref jrer nzbat gul ubabhenoyr jbzra: hcba gul evtug
unaq qvq fgnaq gur dhrra va tbyq bs Bcuve.

45:10 Urnexra, B qnhtugre, naq pbafvqre, naq vapyvar guvar rne; sbetrg
nyfb guvar bja crbcyr, naq gul sngure'f ubhfr;

45:11 Fb funyy gur xvat terngyl qrfver gul ornhgl: sbe ur vf gul Ybeq;
naq jbefuvc gubh uvz.

45:12 Naq gur qnhtugre bs Gler funyy or gurer jvgu n tvsg; rira gur
evpu nzbat gur crbcyr funyy vagerng gul snibhe.

45:13 Gur xvat'f qnhtugre vf nyy tybevbhf jvguva: ure pybguvat vf bs
jebhtug tbyq.

45:14 Fur funyy or oebhtug hagb gur xvat va envzrag bs arrqyrjbex: gur
ivetvaf ure pbzcnavbaf gung sbyybj ure funyy or oebhtug hagb gurr.

45:15 Jvgu tynqarff naq erwbvpvat funyy gurl or oebhtug: gurl funyy
ragre vagb gur xvat'f cnynpr.

45:16 Vafgrnq bs gul snguref funyy or gul puvyqera, jubz gubh znlrfg
znxr cevaprf va nyy gur rnegu.

45:17 V jvyy znxr gul anzr gb or erzrzorerq va nyy trarengvbaf:
gurersber funyy gur crbcyr cenvfr gurr sbe rire naq rire.



46:1 Tbq vf bhe ershtr naq fgeratgu, n irel cerfrag uryc va gebhoyr.

46:2 Gurersber jvyy abg jr srne, gubhtu gur rnegu or erzbirq, naq
gubhtu gur zbhagnvaf or pneevrq vagb gur zvqfg bs gur frn;

46:3 Gubhtu gur jngref gurerbs ebne naq or gebhoyrq, gubhtu gur
zbhagnvaf funxr jvgu gur fjryyvat gurerbs. Frynu.

46:4 Gurer vf n evire, gur fgernzf jurerbs funyy znxr tynq gur pvgl bs
Tbq, gur ubyl cynpr bs gur gnoreanpyrf bs gur zbfg Uvtu.

46:5 Tbq vf va gur zvqfg bs ure; fur funyy abg or zbirq: Tbq funyy
uryc ure, naq gung evtug rneyl.

46:6 Gur urngura entrq, gur xvatqbzf jrer zbirq: ur hggrerq uvf ibvpr,
gur rnegu zrygrq.

46:7 Gur YBEQ bs ubfgf vf jvgu hf; gur Tbq bs Wnpbo vf bhe ershtr.
Frynu.

46:8 Pbzr, orubyq gur jbexf bs gur YBEQ, jung qrfbyngvbaf ur ungu znqr
va gur rnegu.

46:9 Ur znxrgu jnef gb prnfr hagb gur raq bs gur rnegu; ur oernxrgu
gur obj, naq phggrgu gur fcrne va fhaqre; ur oheargu gur punevbg va
gur sver.

46:10 Or fgvyy, naq xabj gung V nz Tbq: V jvyy or rknygrq nzbat gur
urngura, V jvyy or rknygrq va gur rnegu.

46:11 Gur YBEQ bs ubfgf vf jvgu hf; gur Tbq bs Wnpbo vf bhe ershtr.
Frynu.



47:1 B pync lbhe unaqf, nyy lr crbcyr; fubhg hagb Tbq jvgu gur ibvpr
bs gevhzcu.

47:2 Sbe gur YBEQ zbfg uvtu vf greevoyr; ur vf n terng Xvat bire nyy
gur rnegu.

47:3 Ur funyy fhoqhr gur crbcyr haqre hf, naq gur angvbaf haqre bhe
srrg.

47:4 Ur funyy pubbfr bhe vaurevgnapr sbe hf, gur rkpryyrapl bs Wnpbo
jubz ur ybirq. Frynu.

47:5 Tbq vf tbar hc jvgu n fubhg, gur YBEQ jvgu gur fbhaq bs n
gehzcrg.

47:6 Fvat cenvfrf gb Tbq, fvat cenvfrf: fvat cenvfrf hagb bhe Xvat,
fvat cenvfrf.

47:7 Sbe Tbq vf gur Xvat bs nyy gur rnegu: fvat lr cenvfrf jvgu
haqrefgnaqvat.

47:8 Tbq ervtargu bire gur urngura: Tbq fvggrgu hcba gur guebar bs uvf
ubyvarff.

47:9 Gur cevaprf bs gur crbcyr ner tngurerq gbtrgure, rira gur crbcyr
bs gur Tbq bs Noenunz: sbe gur fuvryqf bs gur rnegu orybat hagb Tbq:
ur vf terngyl rknygrq.



48:1 Terng vf gur YBEQ, naq terngyl gb or cenvfrq va gur pvgl bs bhe
Tbq, va gur zbhagnva bs uvf ubyvarff.

48:2 Ornhgvshy sbe fvghngvba, gur wbl bs gur jubyr rnegu, vf zbhag
Mvba, ba gur fvqrf bs gur abegu, gur pvgl bs gur terng Xvat.

48:3 Tbq vf xabja va ure cnynprf sbe n ershtr.

48:4 Sbe, yb, gur xvatf jrer nffrzoyrq, gurl cnffrq ol gbtrgure.

48:5 Gurl fnj vg, naq fb gurl zneiryyrq; gurl jrer gebhoyrq, naq
unfgrq njnl.

48:6 Srne gbbx ubyq hcba gurz gurer, naq cnva, nf bs n jbzna va
geninvy.

48:7 Gubh oernxrfg gur fuvcf bs Gnefuvfu jvgu na rnfg jvaq.

48:8 Nf jr unir urneq, fb unir jr frra va gur pvgl bs gur YBEQ bs
ubfgf, va gur pvgl bs bhe Tbq: Tbq jvyy rfgnoyvfu vg sbe rire. Frynu.

48:9 Jr unir gubhtug bs gul ybivatxvaqarff, B Tbq, va gur zvqfg bs gul
grzcyr.

48:10 Nppbeqvat gb gul anzr, B Tbq, fb vf gul cenvfr hagb gur raqf bs
gur rnegu: gul evtug unaq vf shyy bs evtugrbhfarff.

48:11 Yrg zbhag Mvba erwbvpr, yrg gur qnhtugref bs Whqnu or tynq,
orpnhfr bs gul whqtzragf.

48:12 Jnyx nobhg Mvba, naq tb ebhaq nobhg ure: gryy gur gbjref
gurerbs.

48:13 Znex lr jryy ure ohyjnexf, pbafvqre ure cnynprf; gung lr znl
gryy vg gb gur trarengvba sbyybjvat.

48:14 Sbe guvf Tbq vf bhe Tbq sbe rire naq rire: ur jvyy or bhe thvqr
rira hagb qrngu.



49:1 Urne guvf, nyy lr crbcyr; tvir rne, nyy lr vaunovgnagf bs gur
jbeyq:

49:2 Obgu ybj naq uvtu, evpu naq cbbe, gbtrgure.

49:3 Zl zbhgu funyy fcrnx bs jvfqbz; naq gur zrqvgngvba bs zl urneg
funyy or bs haqrefgnaqvat.

49:4 V jvyy vapyvar zvar rne gb n cnenoyr: V jvyy bcra zl qnex fnlvat
hcba gur unec.

49:5 Jurersber fubhyq V srne va gur qnlf bs rivy, jura gur vavdhvgl bs
zl urryf funyy pbzcnff zr nobhg?

49:6 Gurl gung gehfg va gurve jrnygu, naq obnfg gurzfryirf va gur
zhygvghqr bs gurve evpurf;

49:7 Abar bs gurz pna ol nal zrnaf erqrrz uvf oebgure, abe tvir gb Tbq
n enafbz sbe uvz:

49:8 (Sbe gur erqrzcgvba bs gurve fbhy vf cerpvbhf, naq vg prnfrgu sbe
rire:)

49:9 Gung ur fubhyq fgvyy yvir sbe rire, naq abg frr pbeehcgvba.

49:10 Sbe ur frrgu gung jvfr zra qvr, yvxrjvfr gur sbby naq gur
oehgvfu crefba crevfu, naq yrnir gurve jrnygu gb bguref.

49:11 Gurve vajneq gubhtug vf, gung gurve ubhfrf funyy pbagvahr sbe
rire, naq gurve qjryyvat cynprf gb nyy trarengvbaf; gurl pnyy gurve
ynaqf nsgre gurve bja anzrf.

49:12 Arireguryrff zna orvat va ubabhe novqrgu abg: ur vf yvxr gur
ornfgf gung crevfu.

49:13 Guvf gurve jnl vf gurve sbyyl: lrg gurve cbfgrevgl nccebir gurve
fnlvatf. Frynu.

49:14 Yvxr furrc gurl ner ynvq va gur tenir; qrngu funyy srrq ba gurz;
naq gur hcevtug funyy unir qbzvavba bire gurz va gur zbeavat; naq
gurve ornhgl funyy pbafhzr va gur tenir sebz gurve qjryyvat.

49:15 Ohg Tbq jvyy erqrrz zl fbhy sebz gur cbjre bs gur tenir: sbe ur
funyy erprvir zr. Frynu.

49:16 Or abg gubh nsenvq jura bar vf znqr evpu, jura gur tybel bs uvf
ubhfr vf vapernfrq;

49:17 Sbe jura ur qvrgu ur funyy pneel abguvat njnl: uvf tybel funyy
abg qrfpraq nsgre uvz.

49:18 Gubhtu juvyr ur yvirq ur oyrffrq uvf fbhy: naq zra jvyy cenvfr
gurr, jura gubh qbrfg jryy gb gulfrys.

49:19 Ur funyy tb gb gur trarengvba bs uvf snguref; gurl funyy arire
frr yvtug.

49:20 Zna gung vf va ubabhe, naq haqrefgnaqrgu abg, vf yvxr gur ornfgf
gung crevfu.



50:1 Gur zvtugl Tbq, rira gur YBEQ, ungu fcbxra, naq pnyyrq gur rnegu
sebz gur evfvat bs gur fha hagb gur tbvat qbja gurerbs.

50:2 Bhg bs Mvba, gur cresrpgvba bs ornhgl, Tbq ungu fuvarq.

50:3 Bhe Tbq funyy pbzr, naq funyy abg xrrc fvyrapr: n sver funyy
qribhe orsber uvz, naq vg funyy or irel grzcrfghbhf ebhaq nobhg uvz.

50:4 Ur funyy pnyy gb gur urniraf sebz nobir, naq gb gur rnegu, gung
ur znl whqtr uvf crbcyr.

50:5 Tngure zl fnvagf gbtrgure hagb zr; gubfr gung unir znqr n
pbiranag jvgu zr ol fnpevsvpr.

50:6 Naq gur urniraf funyy qrpyner uvf evtugrbhfarff: sbe Tbq vf whqtr
uvzfrys. Frynu.

50:7 Urne, B zl crbcyr, naq V jvyy fcrnx; B Vfenry, naq V jvyy grfgvsl
ntnvafg gurr: V nz Tbq, rira gul Tbq.

50:8 V jvyy abg ercebir gurr sbe gul fnpevsvprf be gul oheag
bssrevatf, gb unir orra pbagvahnyyl orsber zr.

50:9 V jvyy gnxr ab ohyybpx bhg bs gul ubhfr, abe ur tbngf bhg bs gul
sbyqf.

50:10 Sbe rirel ornfg bs gur sberfg vf zvar, naq gur pnggyr hcba n
gubhfnaq uvyyf.

50:11 V xabj nyy gur sbjyf bs gur zbhagnvaf: naq gur jvyq ornfgf bs
gur svryq ner zvar.

50:12 Vs V jrer uhatel, V jbhyq abg gryy gurr: sbe gur jbeyq vf zvar,
naq gur shyarff gurerbs.

50:13 Jvyy V rng gur syrfu bs ohyyf, be qevax gur oybbq bs tbngf?

50:14 Bssre hagb Tbq gunaxftvivat; naq cnl gul ibjf hagb gur zbfg
Uvtu:

50:15 Naq pnyy hcba zr va gur qnl bs gebhoyr: V jvyy qryvire gurr, naq
gubh funyg tybevsl zr.

50:16 Ohg hagb gur jvpxrq Tbq fnvgu, Jung unfg gubh gb qb gb qrpyner
zl fgnghgrf, be gung gubh fubhyqrfg gnxr zl pbiranag va gul zbhgu?

50:17 Frrvat gubh ungrfg vafgehpgvba, naq pnfgrgu zl jbeqf oruvaq
gurr.

50:18 Jura gubh fnjrfg n guvrs, gura gubh pbafragrqfg jvgu uvz, naq
unfg orra cnegnxre jvgu nqhygreref.

50:19 Gubh tvirfg gul zbhgu gb rivy, naq gul gbathr senzrgu qrprvg.

50:20 Gubh fvggrfg naq fcrnxrfg ntnvafg gul oebgure; gubh fynaqrerfg
guvar bja zbgure'f fba.

50:21 Gurfr guvatf unfg gubh qbar, naq V xrcg fvyrapr; gubh gubhtugrfg
gung V jnf nygbtrgure fhpu na bar nf gulfrys: ohg V jvyy ercebir gurr,
naq frg gurz va beqre orsber guvar rlrf.

50:22 Abj pbafvqre guvf, lr gung sbetrg Tbq, yrfg V grne lbh va
cvrprf, naq gurer or abar gb qryvire.

50:23 Jubfb bssrergu cenvfr tybevsvrgu zr: naq gb uvz gung beqrergu
uvf pbairefngvba nevtug jvyy V furj gur fnyingvba bs Tbq.



51:1 Unir zrepl hcba zr, B Tbq, nppbeqvat gb gul ybivatxvaqarff:
nppbeqvat hagb gur zhygvghqr bs gul graqre zrepvrf oybg bhg zl
genafterffvbaf.

51:2 Jnfu zr guebhtuyl sebz zvar vavdhvgl, naq pyrnafr zr sebz zl fva.

51:3 Sbe V npxabjyrqtr zl genafterffvbaf: naq zl fva vf rire orsber
zr.

51:4 Ntnvafg gurr, gurr bayl, unir V fvaarq, naq qbar guvf rivy va gul
fvtug: gung gubh zvtugrfg or whfgvsvrq jura gubh fcrnxrfg, naq or
pyrne jura gubh whqtrfg.

51:5 Orubyq, V jnf funcra va vavdhvgl; naq va fva qvq zl zbgure
pbaprvir zr.

51:6 Orubyq, gubh qrfverfg gehgu va gur vajneq cnegf: naq va gur
uvqqra cneg gubh funyg znxr zr gb xabj jvfqbz.

51:7 Chetr zr jvgu ulffbc, naq V funyy or pyrna: jnfu zr, naq V funyy
or juvgre guna fabj.

51:8 Znxr zr gb urne wbl naq tynqarff; gung gur obarf juvpu gubh unfg
oebxra znl erwbvpr.

51:9 Uvqr gul snpr sebz zl fvaf, naq oybg bhg nyy zvar vavdhvgvrf.

51:10 Perngr va zr n pyrna urneg, B Tbq; naq erarj n evtug fcvevg
jvguva zr.

51:11 Pnfg zr abg njnl sebz gul cerfrapr; naq gnxr abg gul ubyl fcvevg
sebz zr.

51:12 Erfgber hagb zr gur wbl bs gul fnyingvba; naq hcubyq zr jvgu gul
serr fcvevg.

51:13 Gura jvyy V grnpu genafterffbef gul jnlf; naq fvaaref funyy or
pbairegrq hagb gurr.

51:14 Qryvire zr sebz oybbqthvygvarff, B Tbq, gubh Tbq bs zl
fnyingvba: naq zl gbathr funyy fvat nybhq bs gul evtugrbhfarff.

51:15 B Ybeq, bcra gubh zl yvcf; naq zl zbhgu funyy furj sbegu gul
cenvfr.

51:16 Sbe gubh qrfverfg abg fnpevsvpr; ryfr jbhyq V tvir vg: gubh
qryvtugrfg abg va oheag bssrevat.

51:17 Gur fnpevsvprf bs Tbq ner n oebxra fcvevg: n oebxra naq n
pbagevgr urneg, B Tbq, gubh jvyg abg qrfcvfr.

51:18 Qb tbbq va gul tbbq cyrnfher hagb Mvba: ohvyq gubh gur jnyyf bs
Wrehfnyrz.

51:19 Gura funyg gubh or cyrnfrq jvgu gur fnpevsvprf bs evtugrbhfarff,
jvgu oheag bssrevat naq jubyr oheag bssrevat: gura funyy gurl bssre
ohyybpxf hcba guvar nygne.



52:1 Jul obnfgrfg gubh gulfrys va zvfpuvrs, B zvtugl zna? gur tbbqarff
bs Tbq raqhergu pbagvahnyyl.

52:2 Gur gbathr qrivfrgu zvfpuvrsf; yvxr n funec enmbe, jbexvat
qrprvgshyyl.

52:3 Gubh ybirfg rivy zber guna tbbq; naq ylvat engure guna gb fcrnx
evtugrbhfarff. Frynu.

52:4 Gubh ybirfg nyy qribhevat jbeqf, B gubh qrprvgshy gbathr.

52:5 Tbq funyy yvxrjvfr qrfgebl gurr sbe rire, ur funyy gnxr gurr
njnl, naq cyhpx gurr bhg bs gul qjryyvat cynpr, naq ebbg gurr bhg bs
gur ynaq bs gur yvivat. Frynu.

52:6 Gur evtugrbhf nyfb funyy frr, naq srne, naq funyy ynhtu ng uvz:

52:7 Yb, guvf vf gur zna gung znqr abg Tbq uvf fgeratgu; ohg gehfgrq
va gur nohaqnapr bs uvf evpurf, naq fgeratgurarq uvzfrys va uvf
jvpxrqarff.

52:8 Ohg V nz yvxr n terra byvir gerr va gur ubhfr bs Tbq: V gehfg va
gur zrepl bs Tbq sbe rire naq rire.

52:9 V jvyy cenvfr gurr sbe rire, orpnhfr gubh unfg qbar vg: naq V
jvyy jnvg ba gul anzr; sbe vg vf tbbq orsber gul fnvagf.



53:1 Gur sbby ungu fnvq va uvf urneg, Gurer vf ab Tbq. Pbeehcg ner
gurl, naq unir qbar nobzvanoyr vavdhvgl: gurer vf abar gung qbrgu
tbbq.

53:2 Tbq ybbxrq qbja sebz urnira hcba gur puvyqera bs zra, gb frr vs
gurer jrer nal gung qvq haqrefgnaq, gung qvq frrx Tbq.

53:3 Rirel bar bs gurz vf tbar onpx: gurl ner nygbtrgure orpbzr
svygul; gurer vf abar gung qbrgu tbbq, ab, abg bar.

53:4 Unir gur jbexref bs vavdhvgl ab xabjyrqtr? jub rng hc zl crbcyr
nf gurl rng oernq: gurl unir abg pnyyrq hcba Tbq.

53:5 Gurer jrer gurl va terng srne, jurer ab srne jnf: sbe Tbq ungu
fpnggrerq gur obarf bs uvz gung rapnzcrgu ntnvafg gurr: gubh unfg chg
gurz gb funzr, orpnhfr Tbq ungu qrfcvfrq gurz.

53:6 Bu gung gur fnyingvba bs Vfenry jrer pbzr bhg bs Mvba! Jura Tbq
oevatrgu onpx gur pncgvivgl bs uvf crbcyr, Wnpbo funyy erwbvpr, naq
Vfenry funyy or tynq.



54:1 Fnir zr, B Tbq, ol gul anzr, naq whqtr zr ol gul fgeratgu.

54:2 Urne zl cenlre, B Tbq; tvir rne gb gur jbeqf bs zl zbhgu.

54:3 Sbe fgenatref ner evfra hc ntnvafg zr, naq bccerffbef frrx nsgre
zl fbhy: gurl unir abg frg Tbq orsber gurz. Frynu.

54:4 Orubyq, Tbq vf zvar urycre: gur Ybeq vf jvgu gurz gung hcubyq zl
fbhy.

54:5 Ur funyy erjneq rivy hagb zvar rarzvrf: phg gurz bss va gul
gehgu.

54:6 V jvyy serryl fnpevsvpr hagb gurr: V jvyy cenvfr gul anzr, B
YBEQ; sbe vg vf tbbq.

54:7 Sbe ur ungu qryvirerq zr bhg bs nyy gebhoyr: naq zvar rlr ungu
frra uvf qrfver hcba zvar rarzvrf.



55:1 Tvir rne gb zl cenlre, B Tbq; naq uvqr abg gulfrys sebz zl
fhccyvpngvba.

55:2 Nggraq hagb zr, naq urne zr: V zbhea va zl pbzcynvag, naq znxr n
abvfr;

55:3 Orpnhfr bs gur ibvpr bs gur rarzl, orpnhfr bs gur bccerffvba bs
gur jvpxrq: sbe gurl pnfg vavdhvgl hcba zr, naq va jengu gurl ungr zr.

55:4 Zl urneg vf fber cnvarq jvguva zr: naq gur greebef bs qrngu ner
snyyra hcba zr.

55:5 Srneshyarff naq gerzoyvat ner pbzr hcba zr, naq ubeebe ungu
birejuryzrq zr.

55:6 Naq V fnvq, Bu gung V unq jvatf yvxr n qbir! sbe gura jbhyq V syl
njnl, naq or ng erfg.

55:7 Yb, gura jbhyq V jnaqre sne bss, naq erznva va gur jvyqrearff.
Frynu.

55:8 V jbhyq unfgra zl rfpncr sebz gur jvaql fgbez naq grzcrfg.

55:9 Qrfgebl, B Ybeq, naq qvivqr gurve gbathrf: sbe V unir frra
ivbyrapr naq fgevsr va gur pvgl.

55:10 Qnl naq avtug gurl tb nobhg vg hcba gur jnyyf gurerbs: zvfpuvrs
nyfb naq fbeebj ner va gur zvqfg bs vg.

55:11 Jvpxrqarff vf va gur zvqfg gurerbs: qrprvg naq thvyr qrcneg abg
sebz ure fgerrgf.

55:12 Sbe vg jnf abg na rarzl gung ercebnpurq zr; gura V pbhyq unir
obear vg: arvgure jnf vg ur gung ungrq zr gung qvq zntavsl uvzfrys
ntnvafg zr; gura V jbhyq unir uvq zlfrys sebz uvz:

55:13 Ohg vg jnf gubh, n zna zvar rdhny, zl thvqr, naq zvar
npdhnvagnapr.

55:14 Jr gbbx fjrrg pbhafry gbtrgure, naq jnyxrq hagb gur ubhfr bs Tbq
va pbzcnal.

55:15 Yrg qrngu frvmr hcba gurz, naq yrg gurz tb qbja dhvpx vagb uryy:
sbe jvpxrqarff vf va gurve qjryyvatf, naq nzbat gurz.

55:16 Nf sbe zr, V jvyy pnyy hcba Tbq; naq gur YBEQ funyy fnir zr.

55:17 Riravat, naq zbeavat, naq ng abba, jvyy V cenl, naq pel nybhq:
naq ur funyy urne zl ibvpr.

55:18 Ur ungu qryvirerq zl fbhy va crnpr sebz gur onggyr gung jnf
ntnvafg zr: sbe gurer jrer znal jvgu zr.

55:19 Tbq funyy urne, naq nssyvpg gurz, rira ur gung novqrgu bs byq.

Frynu. Orpnhfr gurl unir ab punatrf, gurersber gurl srne abg Tbq.

55:20 Ur ungu chg sbegu uvf unaqf ntnvafg fhpu nf or ng crnpr jvgu
uvz: ur ungu oebxra uvf pbiranag.

55:21 Gur jbeqf bs uvf zbhgu jrer fzbbgure guna ohggre, ohg jne jnf va
uvf urneg: uvf jbeqf jrer fbsgre guna bvy, lrg jrer gurl qenja fjbeqf.

55:22 Pnfg gul oheqra hcba gur YBEQ, naq ur funyy fhfgnva gurr: ur
funyy arire fhssre gur evtugrbhf gb or zbirq.

55:23 Ohg gubh, B Tbq, funyg oevat gurz qbja vagb gur cvg bs
qrfgehpgvba: oybbql naq qrprvgshy zra funyy abg yvir bhg unys gurve
qnlf; ohg V jvyy gehfg va gurr.



56:1 Or zrepvshy hagb zr, B Tbq: sbe zna jbhyq fjnyybj zr hc; ur
svtugvat qnvyl bccerffrgu zr.

56:2 Zvar rarzvrf jbhyq qnvyl fjnyybj zr hc: sbe gurl or znal gung
svtug ntnvafg zr, B gubh zbfg Uvtu.

56:3 Jung gvzr V nz nsenvq, V jvyy gehfg va gurr.

56:4 Va Tbq V jvyy cenvfr uvf jbeq, va Tbq V unir chg zl gehfg; V jvyy
abg srne jung syrfu pna qb hagb zr.

56:5 Rirel qnl gurl jerfg zl jbeqf: nyy gurve gubhtugf ner ntnvafg zr
sbe rivy.

56:6 Gurl tngure gurzfryirf gbtrgure, gurl uvqr gurzfryirf, gurl znex
zl fgrcf, jura gurl jnvg sbe zl fbhy.

56:7 Funyy gurl rfpncr ol vavdhvgl? va guvar natre pnfg qbja gur
crbcyr, B Tbq.

56:8 Gubh gryyrfg zl jnaqrevatf: chg gubh zl grnef vagb gul obggyr:
ner gurl abg va gul obbx?

56:9 Jura V pel hagb gurr, gura funyy zvar rarzvrf ghea onpx: guvf V
xabj; sbe Tbq vf sbe zr.

56:10 Va Tbq jvyy V cenvfr uvf jbeq: va gur YBEQ jvyy V cenvfr uvf
jbeq.

56:11 Va Tbq unir V chg zl gehfg: V jvyy abg or nsenvq jung zna pna qb
hagb zr.

56:12 Gul ibjf ner hcba zr, B Tbq: V jvyy eraqre cenvfrf hagb gurr.

56:13 Sbe gubh unfg qryvirerq zl fbhy sebz qrngu: jvyg abg gubh
qryvire zl srrg sebz snyyvat, gung V znl jnyx orsber Tbq va gur yvtug
bs gur yvivat?



57:1 Or zrepvshy hagb zr, B Tbq, or zrepvshy hagb zr: sbe zl fbhy
gehfgrgu va gurr: lrn, va gur funqbj bs gul jvatf jvyy V znxr zl
ershtr, hagvy gurfr pnynzvgvrf or birecnfg.

57:2 V jvyy pel hagb Tbq zbfg uvtu; hagb Tbq gung cresbezrgu nyy
guvatf sbe zr.

57:3 Ur funyy fraq sebz urnira, naq fnir zr sebz gur ercebnpu bs uvz
gung jbhyq fjnyybj zr hc. Frynu. Tbq funyy fraq sbegu uvf zrepl naq
uvf gehgu.

57:4 Zl fbhy vf nzbat yvbaf: naq V yvr rira nzbat gurz gung ner frg ba
sver, rira gur fbaf bs zra, jubfr grrgu ner fcrnef naq neebjf, naq
gurve gbathr n funec fjbeq.

57:5 Or gubh rknygrq, B Tbq, nobir gur urniraf; yrg gul tybel or nobir
nyy gur rnegu.

57:6 Gurl unir cercnerq n arg sbe zl fgrcf; zl fbhy vf objrq qbja:
gurl unir qvttrq n cvg orsber zr, vagb gur zvqfg jurerbs gurl ner
snyyra gurzfryirf. Frynu.

57:7 Zl urneg vf svkrq, B Tbq, zl urneg vf svkrq: V jvyy fvat naq tvir
cenvfr.

57:8 Njnxr hc, zl tybel; njnxr, cfnygrel naq unec: V zlfrys jvyy njnxr
rneyl.

57:9 V jvyy cenvfr gurr, B Ybeq, nzbat gur crbcyr: V jvyy fvat hagb
gurr nzbat gur angvbaf.

57:10 Sbe gul zrepl vf terng hagb gur urniraf, naq gul gehgu hagb gur
pybhqf.

57:11 Or gubh rknygrq, B Tbq, nobir gur urniraf: yrg gul tybel or
nobir nyy gur rnegu.



58:1 Qb lr vaqrrq fcrnx evtugrbhfarff, B pbatertngvba? qb lr whqtr
hcevtugyl, B lr fbaf bs zra?

58:2 Lrn, va urneg lr jbex jvpxrqarff; lr jrvtu gur ivbyrapr bs lbhe
unaqf va gur rnegu.

58:3 Gur jvpxrq ner rfgenatrq sebz gur jbzo: gurl tb nfgenl nf fbba nf
gurl or obea, fcrnxvat yvrf.

58:4 Gurve cbvfba vf yvxr gur cbvfba bs n frecrag: gurl ner yvxr gur
qrns nqqre gung fgbccrgu ure rne;

58:5 Juvpu jvyy abg urnexra gb gur ibvpr bs punezref, punezvat arire
fb jvfryl.

58:6 Oernx gurve grrgu, B Tbq, va gurve zbhgu: oernx bhg gur terng
grrgu bs gur lbhat yvbaf, B YBEQ.

58:7 Yrg gurz zryg njnl nf jngref juvpu eha pbagvahnyyl: jura ur
oraqrgu uvf obj gb fubbg uvf neebjf, yrg gurz or nf phg va cvrprf.

58:8 Nf n fanvy juvpu zrygrgu, yrg rirel bar bs gurz cnff njnl: yvxr
gur hagvzryl ovegu bs n jbzna, gung gurl znl abg frr gur fha.

58:9 Orsber lbhe cbgf pna srry gur gubeaf, ur funyy gnxr gurz njnl nf
jvgu n juveyjvaq, obgu yvivat, naq va uvf jengu.

58:10 Gur evtugrbhf funyy erwbvpr jura ur frrgu gur iratrnapr: ur
funyy jnfu uvf srrg va gur oybbq bs gur jvpxrq.

58:11 Fb gung n zna funyy fnl, Irevyl gurer vf n erjneq sbe gur
evtugrbhf: irevyl ur vf n Tbq gung whqtrgu va gur rnegu.



59:1 Qryvire zr sebz zvar rarzvrf, B zl Tbq: qrsraq zr sebz gurz gung
evfr hc ntnvafg zr.

59:2 Qryvire zr sebz gur jbexref bs vavdhvgl, naq fnir zr sebz oybbql
zra.

59:3 Sbe, yb, gurl yvr va jnvg sbe zl fbhy: gur zvtugl ner tngurerq
ntnvafg zr; abg sbe zl genafterffvba, abe sbe zl fva, B YBEQ.

59:4 Gurl eha naq cercner gurzfryirf jvgubhg zl snhyg: njnxr gb uryc
zr, naq orubyq.

59:5 Gubh gurersber, B YBEQ Tbq bs ubfgf, gur Tbq bs Vfenry, njnxr gb
ivfvg nyy gur urngura: or abg zrepvshy gb nal jvpxrq genafterffbef.
Frynu.

59:6 Gurl erghea ng riravat: gurl znxr n abvfr yvxr n qbt, naq tb
ebhaq nobhg gur pvgl.

59:7 Orubyq, gurl orypu bhg jvgu gurve zbhgu: fjbeqf ner va gurve
yvcf: sbe jub, fnl gurl, qbgu urne?

59:8 Ohg gubh, B YBEQ, funyg ynhtu ng gurz; gubh funyg unir nyy gur
urngura va qrevfvba.

59:9 Orpnhfr bs uvf fgeratgu jvyy V jnvg hcba gurr: sbe Tbq vf zl
qrsrapr.

59:10 Gur Tbq bs zl zrepl funyy cerirag zr: Tbq funyy yrg zr frr zl
qrfver hcba zvar rarzvrf.

59:11 Fynl gurz abg, yrfg zl crbcyr sbetrg: fpnggre gurz ol gul cbjre;
naq oevat gurz qbja, B Ybeq bhe fuvryq.

59:12 Sbe gur fva bs gurve zbhgu naq gur jbeqf bs gurve yvcf yrg gurz
rira or gnxra va gurve cevqr: naq sbe phefvat naq ylvat juvpu gurl
fcrnx.

59:13 Pbafhzr gurz va jengu, pbafhzr gurz, gung gurl znl abg or: naq
yrg gurz xabj gung Tbq ehyrgu va Wnpbo hagb gur raqf bs gur rnegu.
Frynu.

59:14 Naq ng riravat yrg gurz erghea; naq yrg gurz znxr n abvfr yvxr n
qbt, naq tb ebhaq nobhg gur pvgl.

59:15 Yrg gurz jnaqre hc naq qbja sbe zrng, naq tehqtr vs gurl or abg
fngvfsvrq.

59:16 Ohg V jvyy fvat bs gul cbjre; lrn, V jvyy fvat nybhq bs gul
zrepl va gur zbeavat: sbe gubh unfg orra zl qrsrapr naq ershtr va gur
qnl bs zl gebhoyr.

59:17 Hagb gurr, B zl fgeratgu, jvyy V fvat: sbe Tbq vf zl qrsrapr,
naq gur Tbq bs zl zrepl.



60:1 B Tbq, gubh unfg pnfg hf bss, gubh unfg fpnggrerq hf, gubh unfg
orra qvfcyrnfrq; B ghea gulfrys gb hf ntnva.

60:2 Gubh unfg znqr gur rnegu gb gerzoyr; gubh unfg oebxra vg: urny
gur oernpurf gurerbs; sbe vg funxrgu.

60:3 Gubh unfg furjrq gul crbcyr uneq guvatf: gubh unfg znqr hf gb
qevax gur jvar bs nfgbavfuzrag.

60:4 Gubh unfg tvira n onaare gb gurz gung srne gurr, gung vg znl or
qvfcynlrq orpnhfr bs gur gehgu. Frynu.

60:5 Gung gul orybirq znl or qryvirerq; fnir jvgu gul evtug unaq, naq
urne zr.

60:6 Tbq ungu fcbxra va uvf ubyvarff; V jvyy erwbvpr, V jvyy qvivqr
Furpurz, naq zrgr bhg gur inyyrl bs Fhppbgu.

60:7 Tvyrnq vf zvar, naq Znanffru vf zvar; Rcuenvz nyfb vf gur
fgeratgu bs zvar urnq; Whqnu vf zl ynjtvire;

60:8 Zbno vf zl jnfucbg; bire Rqbz jvyy V pnfg bhg zl fubr: Cuvyvfgvn,
gevhzcu gubh orpnhfr bs zr.

60:9 Jub jvyy oevat zr vagb gur fgebat pvgl? jub jvyy yrnq zr vagb
Rqbz?

60:10 Jvyg abg gubh, B Tbq, juvpu unqfg pnfg hf bss? naq gubh, B Tbq,
juvpu qvqfg abg tb bhg jvgu bhe nezvrf?

60:11 Tvir hf uryc sebz gebhoyr: sbe inva vf gur uryc bs zna.

60:12 Guebhtu Tbq jr funyy qb inyvnagyl: sbe ur vg vf gung funyy gernq
qbja bhe rarzvrf.



61:1 Urne zl pel, B Tbq; nggraq hagb zl cenlre.

61:2 Sebz gur raq bs gur rnegu jvyy V pel hagb gurr, jura zl urneg vf
birejuryzrq: yrnq zr gb gur ebpx gung vf uvture guna V.

61:3 Sbe gubh unfg orra n furygre sbe zr, naq n fgebat gbjre sebz gur
rarzl.

61:4 V jvyy novqr va gul gnoreanpyr sbe rire: V jvyy gehfg va gur
pbireg bs gul jvatf. Frynu.

61:5 Sbe gubh, B Tbq, unfg urneq zl ibjf: gubh unfg tvira zr gur
urevgntr bs gubfr gung srne gul anzr.

61:6 Gubh jvyg cebybat gur xvat'f yvsr: naq uvf lrnef nf znal
trarengvbaf.

61:7 Ur funyy novqr orsber Tbq sbe rire: B cercner zrepl naq gehgu,
juvpu znl cerfreir uvz.

61:8 Fb jvyy V fvat cenvfr hagb gul anzr sbe rire, gung V znl qnvyl
cresbez zl ibjf.



62:1 Gehyl zl fbhy jnvgrgu hcba Tbq: sebz uvz pbzrgu zl fnyingvba.

62:2 Ur bayl vf zl ebpx naq zl fnyingvba; ur vf zl qrsrapr; V funyy
abg or terngyl zbirq.

62:3 Ubj ybat jvyy lr vzntvar zvfpuvrs ntnvafg n zna? lr funyy or
fynva nyy bs lbh: nf n objvat jnyy funyy lr or, naq nf n gbggrevat
srapr.

62:4 Gurl bayl pbafhyg gb pnfg uvz qbja sebz uvf rkpryyrapl: gurl
qryvtug va yvrf: gurl oyrff jvgu gurve zbhgu, ohg gurl phefr vajneqyl.
Frynu.

62:5 Zl fbhy, jnvg gubh bayl hcba Tbq; sbe zl rkcrpgngvba vf sebz uvz.

62:6 Ur bayl vf zl ebpx naq zl fnyingvba: ur vf zl qrsrapr; V funyy
abg or zbirq.

62:7 Va Tbq vf zl fnyingvba naq zl tybel: gur ebpx bs zl fgeratgu, naq
zl ershtr, vf va Tbq.

62:8 Gehfg va uvz ng nyy gvzrf; lr crbcyr, cbhe bhg lbhe urneg orsber
uvz: Tbq vf n ershtr sbe hf. Frynu.

62:9 Fheryl zra bs ybj qrterr ner inavgl, naq zra bs uvtu qrterr ner n
yvr: gb or ynvq va gur onynapr, gurl ner nygbtrgure yvtugre guna
inavgl.

62:10 Gehfg abg va bccerffvba, naq orpbzr abg inva va eboorel: vs
evpurf vapernfr, frg abg lbhe urneg hcba gurz.

62:11 Tbq ungu fcbxra bapr; gjvpr unir V urneq guvf; gung cbjre
orybatrgu hagb Tbq.

62:12 Nyfb hagb gurr, B Ybeq, orybatrgu zrepl: sbe gubh eraqrerfg gb
rirel zna nppbeqvat gb uvf jbex.



63:1 B Tbq, gubh neg zl Tbq; rneyl jvyy V frrx gurr: zl fbhy guvefgrgu
sbe gurr, zl syrfu ybatrgu sbe gurr va n qel naq guvefgl ynaq, jurer
ab jngre vf;

63:2 Gb frr gul cbjre naq gul tybel, fb nf V unir frra gurr va gur
fnapghnel.

63:3 Orpnhfr gul ybivatxvaqarff vf orggre guna yvsr, zl yvcf funyy
cenvfr gurr.

63:4 Guhf jvyy V oyrff gurr juvyr V yvir: V jvyy yvsg hc zl unaqf va
gul anzr.

63:5 Zl fbhy funyy or fngvfsvrq nf jvgu zneebj naq sngarff; naq zl
zbhgu funyy cenvfr gurr jvgu wblshy yvcf:

63:6 Jura V erzrzore gurr hcba zl orq, naq zrqvgngr ba gurr va gur
avtug jngpurf.

63:7 Orpnhfr gubh unfg orra zl uryc, gurersber va gur funqbj bs gul
jvatf jvyy V erwbvpr.

63:8 Zl fbhy sbyybjrgu uneq nsgre gurr: gul evtug unaq hcubyqrgu zr.

63:9 Ohg gubfr gung frrx zl fbhy, gb qrfgebl vg, funyy tb vagb gur
ybjre cnegf bs gur rnegu.

63:10 Gurl funyy snyy ol gur fjbeq: gurl funyy or n cbegvba sbe sbkrf.

63:11 Ohg gur xvat funyy erwbvpr va Tbq; rirel bar gung fjrnergu ol
uvz funyy tybel: ohg gur zbhgu bs gurz gung fcrnx yvrf funyy or
fgbccrq.



64:1 Urne zl ibvpr, B Tbq, va zl cenlre: cerfreir zl yvsr sebz srne bs
gur rarzl.

64:2 Uvqr zr sebz gur frperg pbhafry bs gur jvpxrq; sebz gur
vafheerpgvba bs gur jbexref bs vavdhvgl:

64:3 Jub jurg gurve gbathr yvxr n fjbeq, naq oraq gurve objf gb fubbg
gurve neebjf, rira ovggre jbeqf:

64:4 Gung gurl znl fubbg va frperg ng gur cresrpg: fhqqrayl qb gurl
fubbg ng uvz, naq srne abg.

64:5 Gurl rapbhentr gurzfryirf va na rivy znggre: gurl pbzzhar bs
ynlvat fanerf cevivyl; gurl fnl, Jub funyy frr gurz?

64:6 Gurl frnepu bhg vavdhvgvrf; gurl nppbzcyvfu n qvyvtrag frnepu:
obgu gur vajneq gubhtug bs rirel bar bs gurz, naq gur urneg, vf qrrc.

64:7 Ohg Tbq funyy fubbg ng gurz jvgu na neebj; fhqqrayl funyy gurl or
jbhaqrq.

64:8 Fb gurl funyy znxr gurve bja gbathr gb snyy hcba gurzfryirf: nyy
gung frr gurz funyy syrr njnl.

64:9 Naq nyy zra funyy srne, naq funyy qrpyner gur jbex bs Tbq; sbe
gurl funyy jvfryl pbafvqre bs uvf qbvat.

64:10 Gur evtugrbhf funyy or tynq va gur YBEQ, naq funyy gehfg va uvz;
naq nyy gur hcevtug va urneg funyy tybel.



65:1 Cenvfr jnvgrgu sbe gurr, B Tbq, va Fvba: naq hagb gurr funyy gur
ibj or cresbezrq.

65:2 B gubh gung urnerfg cenlre, hagb gurr funyy nyy syrfu pbzr.

65:3 Vavdhvgvrf cerinvy ntnvafg zr: nf sbe bhe genafterffvbaf, gubh
funyg chetr gurz njnl.

65:4 Oyrffrq vf gur zna jubz gubh pubbfrfg, naq pnhfrfg gb nccebnpu
hagb gurr, gung ur znl qjryy va gul pbhegf: jr funyy or fngvfsvrq jvgu
gur tbbqarff bs gul ubhfr, rira bs gul ubyl grzcyr.

65:5 Ol greevoyr guvatf va evtugrbhfarff jvyg gubh nafjre hf, B Tbq bs
bhe fnyingvba; jub neg gur pbasvqrapr bs nyy gur raqf bs gur rnegu,
naq bs gurz gung ner nsne bss hcba gur frn:

65:6 Juvpu ol uvf fgeratgu frggrgu snfg gur zbhagnvaf; orvat tveqrq
jvgu cbjre:

65:7 Juvpu fgvyyrgu gur abvfr bs gur frnf, gur abvfr bs gurve jnirf,
naq gur ghzhyg bs gur crbcyr.

65:8 Gurl nyfb gung qjryy va gur hggrezbfg cnegf ner nsenvq ng gul
gbxraf: gubh znxrfg gur bhgtbvatf bs gur zbeavat naq riravat gb
erwbvpr.

65:9 Gubh ivfvgrfg gur rnegu, naq jngrerfg vg: gubh terngyl raevpurfg
vg jvgu gur evire bs Tbq, juvpu vf shyy bs jngre: gubh cercnerfg gurz
pbea, jura gubh unfg fb cebivqrq sbe vg.

65:10 Gubh jngrerfg gur evqtrf gurerbs nohaqnagyl: gubh frggyrfg gur
sheebjf gurerbs: gubh znxrfg vg fbsg jvgu fubjref: gubh oyrffrfg gur
fcevatvat gurerbs.

65:11 Gubh pebjarfg gur lrne jvgu gul tbbqarff; naq gul cnguf qebc
sngarff.

65:12 Gurl qebc hcba gur cnfgherf bs gur jvyqrearff: naq gur yvggyr
uvyyf erwbvpr ba rirel fvqr.

65:13 Gur cnfgherf ner pybgurq jvgu sybpxf; gur inyyrlf nyfb ner
pbirerq bire jvgu pbea; gurl fubhg sbe wbl, gurl nyfb fvat.



66:1 Znxr n wblshy abvfr hagb Tbq, nyy lr ynaqf:

66:2 Fvat sbegu gur ubabhe bs uvf anzr: znxr uvf cenvfr tybevbhf.

66:3 Fnl hagb Tbq, Ubj greevoyr neg gubh va gul jbexf! guebhtu gur
terngarff bs gul cbjre funyy guvar rarzvrf fhozvg gurzfryirf hagb
gurr.

66:4 Nyy gur rnegu funyy jbefuvc gurr, naq funyy fvat hagb gurr; gurl
funyy fvat gb gul anzr. Frynu.

66:5 Pbzr naq frr gur jbexf bs Tbq: ur vf greevoyr va uvf qbvat gbjneq
gur puvyqera bs zra.

66:6 Ur ghearq gur frn vagb qel ynaq: gurl jrag guebhtu gur sybbq ba
sbbg: gurer qvq jr erwbvpr va uvz.

66:7 Ur ehyrgu ol uvf cbjre sbe rire; uvf rlrf orubyq gur angvbaf: yrg
abg gur eroryyvbhf rknyg gurzfryirf. Frynu.

66:8 B oyrff bhe Tbq, lr crbcyr, naq znxr gur ibvpr bs uvf cenvfr gb
or urneq:

66:9 Juvpu ubyqrgu bhe fbhy va yvsr, naq fhssrergu abg bhe srrg gb or
zbirq.

66:10 Sbe gubh, B Tbq, unfg cebirq hf: gubh unfg gevrq hf, nf fvyire
vf gevrq.

66:11 Gubh oebhtugrfg hf vagb gur arg; gubh ynvqfg nssyvpgvba hcba bhe
ybvaf.

66:12 Gubh unfg pnhfrq zra gb evqr bire bhe urnqf; jr jrag guebhtu
sver naq guebhtu jngre: ohg gubh oebhtugrfg hf bhg vagb n jrnygul
cynpr.

66:13 V jvyy tb vagb gul ubhfr jvgu oheag bssrevatf: V jvyy cnl gurr
zl ibjf,

66:14 Juvpu zl yvcf unir hggrerq, naq zl zbhgu ungu fcbxra, jura V jnf
va gebhoyr.

66:15 V jvyy bssre hagb gurr oheag fnpevsvprf bs sngyvatf, jvgu gur
